CONQUEST OF FEAR

By

SRI SWAMI SIVANANDA

6(59((cid:15)(cid:3)/29((cid:15)(cid:3)*,9((cid:15)
385,)<(cid:15)(cid:3)0(’,7$7((cid:15)

5($/,=(
So Says

Sri Swami Sivananda

Sri Swami Sivananda

Founder of

The Divine Life Society

A DIVINE LIFE SOCIETY PUBLICATION

Fifth Edition: 1997

(2,000 copies)

World Wide Web (WWW) Reprint : 1997

WWW site: http://www.rsl.ukans.edu/~pkanagar/divine/

This WWW reprint is for free distribution

©  The Divine Life Trust Society

Published By

THE DIVINE LIFE SOCIETY

P.O. SHIVANANDANAGAR—249 192
Distt. Tehri-Garhwal, Uttar Pradesh,

Himalayas, India.

DEDICATED TO

ALL THE GREAT, FEARLESS, HEROIC SOULS

LIKE DHRUVA, PRAHLADA, VEERA ABHIMANYU,

ANGADA, ANJANEYA, SAVITRI,

SHIVAJI, RANA PRATAP, RANI LAKSHMIBAI
AND OTHERS OF THEIR BRAVE FRATERNITY.

MAY THE READERS FOLLOW THEIR INSPIRING

EXAMPLE AND ATTAIN THAT FREE AND FEARLESS

STATE OF KAIVALYA MOKSHA SAMRAJYA

THROUGH THE SUPREME ADVAITA

BRAHMIC EXPERIENCE

PUBLISHERS’NOTE

We have great pleasure in presenting the public with this enlarged edition of the booklet
“Conquest  of  Fear”.    Its  former  edition  was  too  concise  and  inadequate.    Hence,  the  obvious
necessity of a more elaborate and detailed treatment of the subject was felt.  The present work
fulfills that need successfully and in an intensive, and more appreciable form.

The  book  has  been  divided  into  two  sections:  All  about  Fear  and  The  Methods  to
Eradicate Fear.  In the first section of the book an elaborate description of the various aspects of
fear  has  been  given.    It  deals  with  the  various  causes  of  fear,  its  subtle  manifestations  and
workings in different kinds of persons of different temperaments under different circumstances,
its  after-effects  and  subconscious  impressions  etc.    The  second  section  deals  with  the  various
methods for eradicating fear:  the Pratipakshabhavaha or the auto-suggestion method of the Raja
Yogin,  the  practice  of  feeling  the  presence  of  God,  devotion  to  God  and  meditation  on  the
fearless Atman—all of which help to conquer fear.

We are sure that this booklet will be a great help to one and all in enabling them to get

over fear-complex and develop the essential virtue—Courage.

THE DIVINE LIFE SOCIETY

1. BHARTRIHARI ON FEARLESSNESS

%(cid:29)(cid:29)•J(cid:29)•(cid:3)U(cid:29)•J(cid:29)%(cid:29)\(cid:29)|(cid:3)N†O(cid:29)•(cid:3)F\(cid:29)(cid:141)HW(cid:29)%(cid:29)\(cid:29)|(cid:3)HY(cid:29)(cid:134)(cid:29)•(cid:3)Q(cid:29)jS(cid:29)DO(cid:29)D(cid:153)\(cid:29)|(cid:3)(cid:17)
P(cid:29)DQ(cid:29)•(cid:3)GzQ\(cid:29)%(cid:29)\(cid:29)|(cid:3)E(cid:29)O(cid:29)•(cid:3)HUS(cid:29)(cid:141)%(cid:29)\(cid:29)|(cid:3)(cid:16)S(cid:29)•(cid:3)M(cid:29)UD\(cid:29)D(cid:3)%(cid:29)\(cid:29)P(cid:29)“(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)
6(cid:29)DV(cid:13)(cid:29)•(cid:3)Y(cid:29)DHG%(cid:29)\(cid:29)|(cid:3)J(cid:29)(cid:141)1(cid:29)•(cid:3).(cid:29)O(cid:29)%(cid:29)\(cid:29)|(cid:3)ND\(cid:29)•(cid:3)NiW(cid:29)DQW(cid:29)D(cid:153)\(cid:29)|(cid:3)(cid:17)
V(cid:29)Y(cid:29)(cid:129)

|(cid:3)Y(cid:29)VW(cid:29)(cid:141)(cid:3)%(cid:29)\(cid:29)DHQY(cid:29)W(cid:29)|(cid:3)%(cid:29)(cid:141)HY(cid:29)(cid:3)Q(cid:29)j1(cid:29)D|(cid:3)Y(cid:29)zUDJ\(cid:29)P(cid:29)•Y(cid:29)D%(cid:29)\(cid:29)P(cid:29)“(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)

EKRJH(cid:3)URJDEKD\D(cid:213)(cid:3)NXOH(cid:3)F\XWLEKD\D(cid:213)(cid:3)YLWWH(cid:3)Q(cid:192)S„O„GEKD\D(cid:213)(cid:3)_
P„QH(cid:3)GDLQ\DEKD\D(cid:213)(cid:3)EDOH(cid:3)ULSXEKD\D(cid:213)(cid:3)U(cid:190)SH(cid:3)MDU„\„(cid:3)EKD\DP(cid:3)__
—„VWUH(cid:3)Y„GLEKD\D(cid:213)(cid:3)JX˛H(cid:3)NKDODEKD\D(cid:213)(cid:3)N„\H(cid:3)N(cid:192)W„QW„GEKD\D(cid:213)(cid:3)_
VDUYD(cid:213)(cid:3)YDVWX(cid:3)EKD\„QYLWD(cid:213)(cid:3)EKXYL(cid:3)Q(cid:192)˛„(cid:213)(cid:3)YDLU„J\DPHY„EKD\DP(cid:3)__

In  enjoyment,  there  is  fear  of  disease;  in  social  position,  there  is  fear  of  falling  off;  in
wealth, there is the fear of (hostile) kings; in honour, there is the fear of humiliation; in power,
there is the fear of foes; in beauty, there is the fear of old age; in scriptural erudition, there is the
fear  of  opponents;  in  virtue,  there  is  the  fear  of  traducers;  in  body,  there  is  the  fear  of  death;
everything  in  this  world  pertaining  to  men  is  attended  with  fear;  renunciation  alone  leads  to
fearlessness.

(Vairagya-Shatakam)

2. UPANISHADS ON FEARLESSNESS

HˆW(cid:29)L\(cid:29)Dˆz(cid:3)%(cid:29)\(cid:29)|(cid:3)%(cid:29)Y(cid:29)HW(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)

GYLW…\„GYDL(cid:3)EKD\D(cid:213)(cid:3)EKDYDWL(cid:3)__

“There is fear from duality.” (Non-duality alone is fearless). (Brih. Up. 1. 4.2).

$%(cid:29)\(cid:29)|(cid:3)Y(cid:29)z(cid:3)M(cid:29)Q(cid:29)N(cid:3)(cid:12)DSW(cid:29)(cid:29)•_V(cid:29)LHW(cid:29)(cid:3)K(cid:29)•Y(cid:29)DF(cid:29)(cid:3)\(cid:29)DZY(cid:29)O9\(cid:29)+(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)

DED\D(cid:213)(cid:3)YDL(cid:3)MDQDND(cid:3)SU„SWR(cid:17)DV…WL(cid:3)KRY„FD(cid:3)\„M}DYDON\D(cid:215)(cid:3)__

“Yajnavalkya said: O Janaka!  You have attained the fearless (Brahman).” (Brih. Up.  IV. 2..4).

$%(cid:29)\(cid:29)|(cid:3)Y(cid:29)z(cid:3)E(cid:29)ﬂeD%(cid:29)\(cid:29)|(cid:3)HK(cid:3)Y(cid:29)z(cid:3)E(cid:29)ﬂe(cid:3)%(cid:29)Y(cid:29)HW(cid:29)(cid:3)\(cid:29)(cid:3)2Y(cid:29)|(cid:3)Y(cid:29)•G(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)

DEKD\D(cid:213)(cid:3)YDL(cid:3)EUDKP„EKD\D(cid:213)(cid:3)KL(cid:3)YDL(cid:3)EUDKPD(cid:3)EKDYDWL(cid:3)\D(cid:3)HYD(cid:213)(cid:3)YHGD(cid:3)__

“Brahman is fearless; one who knows this, becomes the fearless Brahman.” (Brih. Up. IV. 4. 25).

\(cid:29)W(cid:29)(cid:29)•(cid:3)Y(cid:29)DF(cid:29)(cid:29)•(cid:3)HQ(cid:29)Y(cid:29)W(cid:29)(cid:129)QW(cid:29)•(cid:3)$(cid:12)DS\(cid:29)(cid:3)P(cid:29)Q(cid:29)V(cid:29)D(cid:3)V(cid:29)K(cid:3)(cid:17)
$(cid:29)Q(cid:29)QG|(cid:3)E(cid:29)ﬂe1(cid:29)(cid:29)•(cid:3)HY(cid:29)ˆDQ(cid:29)“(cid:3)Q(cid:29)(cid:3)HE(cid:29)%(cid:29)•HW(cid:29)(cid:3)N†W(cid:29)ƒ(cid:29)Q(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)

\DWR(cid:3)Y„FR(cid:3)QLYDWDAAUQWH(cid:3)DSU„S\D(cid:3)PDQDV„(cid:3)VDKD(cid:3)_
„QDQGD(cid:213)(cid:3)EUDKPD˛R(cid:3)YLGY„Q(cid:3)QD(cid:3)ELEKHWL(cid:3)NXWD—FDQD(cid:3)__

“Not reaching It, the speech and the mind return back.  One who knows this Bliss of Brahman,
fears not from anything at all.” (Taitt.  Up.  II. 9)

3. BE COURAGEOUS, FRIEND

Difficulties, adversities and sorrows
Are Karmic Purgation;
They instil mercy in the heart,
They turn the mind more towards God,
They are blessings in disguise,
They help your evolution,
And strengthen your will and power of endurance,
They make you more wise and dispassionate.

Muster courage and strength,
Nil desperadum Friend!
Draw strength from within,
Move forward courageously,
Look not back,
Be regular in your meditation,
Stand as a witness or Drashta,
Identify with the Immortal Self

You are born for higher things,
A brilliant future is awaiting you,
Apply diligently to Yoga,
Unfold all latent faculties,
Yield not to unmanliness,
Shake off faintheartedness,
Stand up, be bold and cheerful,
Rejoice, enjoy and be blissful.

Thou art not this body,
Thou art immortal Brahman,
Thou art eternal Atman,
Thou art diseaseless Soul,
Thou art blissful Svarupa,
Thou art All-full Chaitanya,
Thou art invincible Lord of lords.

PREFACE

Fear is a great enemy of man.  It is the enemy of his progress.  It disturbs his peace and
harmony.  It sucks or saps his vitality and energy.  It drains the nervous system of its reserve of
energy.  It produces weakness.

Fear is of two kinds, viz., natural or rational fear, when there is a threatening situation to

endanger life; and unnatural or unusual fear which has no objective reality.

The origin of most neurotic fears can be traced to childhood.  The seeds of fear may lie
dormant in childhood in the subconscious mind.  They sprout forth after some time during some
period of crisis or stress.

Panicky fear is more contagious than typhoid or cholera.  The atom bombs cause terrible

panicky fear.  People leave their houses and move to villages.

Anxiety  and  worry  are  the  effects  of  fear.    Some  sort  of  fear  gets  buried  in  the
subconscious mind.  So man worries himself.  There is continued strain and tension in the mind.
If the fear is released or dispelled, he will have peace of mind.

Normal  fear  is  healthy.    It  paves  the  way  for  one’s  progress.    It  preserves  life.    A
Headmaster is afraid of the Inspector of Schools.  He takes a very keen interest in training the
boys.  All the boys get success in the examination.  An engine-driver of the Railways is afraid of
his superior officer.  He is very careful in the discharge of his duties.  No collision occurs.  A
physician  is  afraid  of  getting  a  bad  reputation.    He  takes  great  care  of  his  patient.    He  makes
researches.  He saves many lives.  He becomes a famous physician also.

Psychologists  are  of  opinion  that  there  cannot  be  absolute  fearlessness  and  that  only
determined  effort  can  be  made  to  conquer  fear.    This  is  incorrect.    Psychologists  have  no
transcendental experience.  A perfect sage who has knowledge of Brahman is absolutely fearless.
Upanishads declare in a thundering voice, “The knower of the fearless Brahman becomes himself
absolutely fearless.” (Brihadaranyakopanishad)

There  can  be  fear  only  where  there  is  duality.    How  can  there  be  fear  for  one  who
experiences non-duality?  Such a person is the most courageous of men.  The courage of a soldier
in the battlefield or of a dacoit is only Tamasic courage.  It is not courage at all.  It is only brutal
ferocity born of hatred or jealousy.  That Sattvic courage born of Wisdom of the Self alone is real
courage.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  fear  exists  to  glorify  courage.    A  timid  man  exists  to  glorify  a
courageous man.  There will be no value for goodness if badness does not exist.  One side of a
thing cannot have significance without the existence of the other side.  Hence everything in this
world has two sides.  Dvandvas exist to keep up the flow of the world.

This  book  throws  much  light  on  the  causes  and  characteristics  of  fear.    It  suggests
efficient remedies for the eradication of fear and cultivating courage and fortitude, and attaining
the fearless Brahman or the Absolute.

Swami Sivananda

CONTENTS

ALL ABOUT FEAR ....................................................................................................................... 1
1. RISE UP! O MAN! ..................................................................................................................... 1
2. WHAT IS FEAR? ........................................................................................................................ 1
3. CAUSE OF FEAR........................................................................................................................ 2
4. FEAR AND RAGA ...................................................................................................................... 2
5. IMAGINARY FEARS.................................................................................................................... 4
6. PHOBIAS.................................................................................................................................... 5
7. DO NOT GENERATE “POOCHANDI” OR “HOWA” SAMSKARAS.................................................. 6
8. FEAR IN VARIOUS FORMS ......................................................................................................... 7
9. TRIUMPH OVER FEAR................................................................................................................ 8
METHODS TO ERADICATE FEAR .......................................................................................... 11
1. VICTORY OVER FEAR.............................................................................................................. 11
2. FEELING THE PRESENCE OF GOD............................................................................................ 12
3. DEVOTION TO GOD ERADICATES ALL FEARS.......................................................................... 14
4. MEDITATION ON ATMAN ........................................................................................................ 15

ALL ABOUT FEAR

ALL ABOUT FEAR

1. RISE UP! O MAN!

Fear  is  illusory;  it  cannot  live.    Courage  is  eternal,  it  will  not  die.    Perils,  calamities,
dangers  are  the  certain  lot  of  every  man  who  is  a  denizen  of  this  world.    Therefore,  O  Man!
Fortify your mind with courage and patience.  Fortitude, courage, presence of mind will sustain
you through all dangers.  Just as a rock on the sea-shore stands firm and the dashing of the waves
does not affect it even a bit, even so a man who is endowed with courage is not affected by the
dark  perilous  waves  of  this  Samsara.    He  stands  adamant  in  all  trying  conditions  and
circumstances and comes out victorious.

A  man  of  courage  does  not  tremble  in  the  hour  of  danger.    He  is  not  embarrassed  and
bewildered.  He does not sink down.    He  is  not  overwhelmed  by  despair..  He  smiles  away  all
dangers and difficulties, blows the trumpet of triumph and attains victory in the end.

The threatenings of fear are a terror to the heart.  Lead a virtuous life.  Live in God.  Be
good.  Serve.  Love.  Give.  Meditate.  Nothing can frighten you.    The  Lord  of  Death  will  be
afraid of you.  The terrors, even of death, will be no terror to you.

Terrify  not  your  soul  with  vain  imaginary  fears.    From  fear  proceeds  misfortune  and
failure.    The  fears  of  a  coward  expose  him  to  danger.    A  coward  dies  many  times  before  his
actual death.  Be bold.  Be cheerful.  Allow not your heart to sink down from the phantasy of
imaginary fears.  Have self-confidence and faith.  Thy birthright is courage.  You are Nectar’s
son.  You are a child of light.  You are an offspring of Immortal Brahman.  Claim thy Birthright
now.  Rise Up! O Man!  Roar OM OM OM.  You are the lion of Vedanta.

2. WHAT IS FEAR?

The Sanskrit equivalent for fear is “Bhaya”.  Fear is an emotion or Vritti in the mind that
is produced when one’s life is in danger on account of external forces or things.  Man reacts to
the situation with a fear-emotion.

It is characterized by pallor of the face, palpitation of heart, slowing of pulse or stoppage,
tremor of limbs, perspiration, expressionless condition of the eyes, passing of urine and faeces
unaware, in extreme cases, choking of voice, inability to speak, etc.  The body becomes like a log
of wood.  The mind gets stunned.  The functions of the senses are inhibited.  In extreme cases
one may die of shock.  In ordinary cases when the cause of fear is removed, he slowly recovers
from the morbid symptoms and comes back to his original state.

1

CONQUEST OF FEAR

3. CAUSE OF FEAR

Ignorance is the cause of fear.  Man tasted the “forbidden fruit” and became a slave of
lust.  He forgot his original, divine nature and was thus caught up in the whirlpool of ignorance.
The  infinite  fearless  Brahman  became  the  finite  Jiva  with  fear.    Identification  of  the  body  or
Dehadhyasa is the cause of fear.

Dehadhyasa is another form of ignorance.  This physical body is an instrument for man’s
sensual enjoyment.  If he suffers from any disease he is afraid that he will lose this body which
serves him as a vehicle for his enjoyment.  He tries his level best to preserve this body.  All other
causes of fear are traceable to Dehadhyasa.

Feeling of inferiority is another cause of fear.. This negative feeling produces lack of self-
reliance  or  self-confidence  in  man.    He  is  afraid  of  those  who  are  superior  to  him  in  talents,
power, position and efficiency.  He feels that he is incapable of doing anything.

Some  physical  deformity  or  deficiency,  lack  of  physical  and  mental  efficiency,  wrong

training in children, are other causes of fear.

There is no other way to get rid of fear than realization of the Self.

4. FEAR AND RAGA

Fear (Bhaya) and Raga (attachment) are modifications or Vrittis in the mind.  They are
temporary whirlpools or waves.  The substance of the mind is nothing but Raga and fear.  They
are twin-sisters.  Hence they are closely related to each other.  If you destroy fear and Raga there
is  neither  life  nor  existence  for  the  mind.    The  Upanishad  declares,  “Detachment,  faith,  fear,
Raga, shyness, modesty, shame. etc.,” are only mind.

Fear is a product of ignorance or Avidya.  Man forgets his essential, divine nature through
Moha or infatuation and identification with the body.  He was the all-pervading immortal fearless
Soul  or  Brahman  in  the  beginning.    He  was  the  “Santam  (Peaceful),  Ajaram  (decayless),
Amritam  (immortal),  Abhayam  (fearless)  Brahman.”  On  account  of  egoism  he  became  a
rebellious child.  He separated himself from his Father.  He had division of property.  He started
his own independent living in this earth-plane.  He rented a house in the mundane world.  He
entered  the  body-house  of  flesh  and  bone  and  became  a  little  timid  man,  a  little  Jiva,  with  all
sorts of fears.  Thus started his downfall on account of his quarrel with his Almighty Father and
owing to his starting a new egoistic living with Raga-Dvesha.

He  was  bodiless  muscle-less,  fleshless,  boneless,  I-less,  mine-less,  desireless,  Vasana-
less, when he was one with the Father, when there was a joint family.  And so he was absolutely
fearless,  and  ever  blissful  and  peaceful.    He  had  no  thought  of  body,  house,  property,  wife,
children, position and prestige.  He had no thought of diseases of body and fall from his social
status  or  prestige.    He  had  no  thought  of  enemies,  war,  riots  and  of  running  to  any  place  for
safety, security.  His original bode was peacefully secure and free from any sort of a danger and

2

ALL ABOUT FEAR

enemies.  It was all one Brahman community.  There was no Hindu-Muslim trouble there.  There
was no fear of attacks through bombs or torpedoes.  It was an impregnable, invulnerable fortress.
It was disease-proof, bomb-proof, earthquake-proof.

In  his  new,  independent  egoistic  life,  he  became  selfish,  crooked,  narrow,  and  mean-
minded.  He entertained low thoughts.  He ever thought of flesh and pleasures of the flesh.  He
practiced the philosophy of flesh and preached the philosophy of flesh which is synonymous with
“Pig-philosophy.”  Every  day  fears  multiplied,  as  he  was  very  much  attached  to  his  body,  the
bodies of wife, children, and to his house, property, etc.

Raga (attachment) is the long-standing associate of fear.  Wherever there is Raga, there is
fear.  Fear and Raga co-exist.  Man is attached to his wife.  The body of his wife is his greatest
pleasure-centre.  So there is fear for him, fear of losing her, fear of her death, fear of her running
away with another man, fear of her divorcing him, fear of her being displeased with him, etc.  As
he is attached to his children, house and property, he has fear of losing his house, property and
children.  He is drowned in sorrow and gets terrible shock if these objects are destroyed or lost.
Hence Raga is the cause of fear.  If there is no Raga, there is no fear.  The first link in the  chain
of Raga is his attachment to his body.  All kinds, of Raga start from this Raga to the physical
body.

Lord Krishna says in His Gita: “Vitaragabhayakrodhah sthitadheer muniruchyate”. “He
who  is  free  from  attachment,  fear  and  anger,  is  called  a  sage  of  stable  mind.”    Abandon
attachment through practice of non-attachment or Vairagya and attachment to the lotus feet of the
Lord or fearless Brahman.  All fears will vanish.

You are attached to a fountain-pen, walking stick, book, watch, towel, cloth.  Fear slowly
creeps in.  There is fear of losing them.  Always entertain the thought “All objects are illusory,
perishable and pain-giving.”  You will have no attachment.  Even if there is attachment, it will be
mild.  You can drive it away with slight thinking and discrimination.

Give up attachment to this body by identifying yourself with the bodiless, sexless, pure,
all-pervading  immortal  Atman  or  Brahman.    All  sorts  of  fears  and  attachments  will  totally
disappear.  Assert, feel, recognize:

“I am bodiless, immortal Soul or Brahman 
I am sexless, all-pervading Atman
I am fearless Brahman
I am full of Vairagya now
There is no world at all
I alone exist
I am Deathless and Blissful
I am Absolute Brahman

OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM

3

May  you  all  be  free  from  Fear  and  Raga!    May  you  all  be  established  in  the  fearless,
(Abhaya,  Nirbhaya)  Brahman  through  the  practice  of  courage  and  meditation  on  the  fearless,
immortal Brahman.

CONQUEST OF FEAR

5. IMAGINARY FEARS

Every  man  has  some  imaginary  fear  of  one  kind  or  another.    Maya  will  never  allow
anybody  to  rest  peacefully.    Man  is  already  agitated  by  lust,  anger,  greed,  jealousy,  pride  and
hatred.  Now fear fans the worldly flame.  It pours Ghee to the flame of the three Taapaas.  Man
jumps now and dances like a monkey.  He has no rest even for a second.

The percentage of normal fear will be only five.  Imaginary fears will come to ninety per

cent.

Imaginary  fears  cause  diseases,  deplete  all  energies  in  man  and  produce  all  sorts  of
feverish  excitement,  low  vitality,  uneasiness,  discomfort,  disharmony,  etc.    When  there  is  an
epidemic or cholera, or typhoid, fear is the predisposing cause.  Man is terribly afraid of cholera,
worries himself and  imagines  that  the  germs  have  entered  his  body.    Imagination  does  serious
havoc.  He becomes a victim to the actual disease itself!

A  student  prepares  himself  day  and  night  for  the  ensuing  examination.    He  has  passed
creditably in all the class examinations.  But he develops a kind of imaginary fear “examination
fear”, as soon as he enters the examination hall, becomes nervous and gets confused.  His hands
tremble.  He is not able to write.  He fails in the examination.

I asked  a  clever  lawyer,  an  M.A.,  LL.B.,  who  can  argue  well  in  the  courts  to  deliver  a
lecture on “Necessity of Religion”.  He ascended the platform.  There was a big audience.  He
developed “stage fear” and got bewildered.  His voice was choked.  He began to perspire.  He
stammered something, cut a poor figure on the platform and got down within five minutes.

Ramakrishna was a healthy man.  He developed a cough on account of exposure to chill
draught of air.  It was a case of simple bronchitis or cold in the chest.  But it persisted for some
weeks.    He  consulted  an  assistant  surgeon.    The  doctor  said,  “It  may  be  a  case  of  T.B.;  have
sanatorium treatments.”

“It  may  be  a  case  of  T.B.”  wrought  much  havoc  in  Ramakrishna.    It  was  a  wrong
suggestion.  It produced an imaginary fear in him.  He began to worry himself from that moment.
His health was pulled down gradually.  He actually contracted T.B. or pulmonary tuberculosis.
All sorts of germs, viz., pneumoniacus, etc., are in this body.  They cannot do any mischief when
one is in possession of good health and high vitality.  When the vitality comes to a low ebb, they
gain the upper hand.  Man easily succumbs to their ravages or attacks.

Sri R.S. Bannerjee was sleeping in a room in his friend’s house at Dehra Dun.  He and his
friends  were  talking  on  that  night  about  the  mischievous  actions  done  by  evil  spirits.    These
thoughts  went  deep  into  his  subconscious  mind.    He  dreamt  that  the  room  in  which  he  was

4

ALL ABOUT FEAR

sleeping was a haunted room and some evil spirit had done some mischief on him.  From that day
he began to lose his health gradually.  This was due to some kind of imaginary fear.

Sri Joshi was a friend of Sri Gupta.  Gupta came to the house of Joshi one evening, did
not talk to him and suddenly left his house as he had to meet his friend that day at the Railway
Station.  Joshi thought that Gupta was very much annoyed towards him.  Joshi saw Gupta talking
seriously with Rajkrishna who was inimical towards him.  Joshi now concluded that Gupta had
become his enemy.  He developed a sort of imaginary fear for Gupta, and thought that he would
divulge all his secrets to Rajkrishna.

Some  develop  imaginary  fear  that  they  will  lose  their  job.    Some  imagine  and  think,
“what will become of my fate if my wife dies now?  I have to took after nine children.” Some
have  imaginary  fear  “What  can  I  do  if  my  business  fails?”  What  will  become  of  Hinduism  if
whole of India becomes Pakistan; if communism pervades whole of India?  There is no end to
such imaginary fears.

Sit  for  a  while.    Reflect  well.    Introspect.    All  imaginary  fears  will  take  to  their  heels.
They will dwindle into an airy nothing.  Mind deceives you through imaginary fears.  Learn to
discriminate, cogitate, reflect and meditate.  Cultivate courage.  Be a silent witness of the mind’s
menagerie.  The mind will lurk like a thief.  You  will  feel  now  that  you  were  duped  all  these
years by this mischievous mind and that fear is a non-entity, a big zero.

6. PHOBIAS

Peculiar,  private,  irrational  and  unnatural  fears  are  called  phobias.    They  have  no
objective reality.  There is nothing to frighten people.  There is no threatening situation in their
environment which should cause fear in them and yet they cannot free themselves from fears and
negative feelings.  The original word in Greek is “Phobos” meaning fear.

Some  are  terribly  afraid  of  scorpions.    This  is  scorpion-phobia.    Some  are  afraid  of
snakes.  This is snake-phobia.  Some are afraid of rats (rat-phobia).  Some are afraid of thunder.
Some  are  afraid  of  walking  in  the  dark.    Some  are  afraid  of  seeing  great  multitude  of  people
(plurophobia).  Some Brahmacharins are afraid of seeing a bevy of ladies.  Some are afraid to
remain alone.  Some are afraid to sleep in a room without a  lamp.    Some  are  afraid  of  closed
spaces  such  as  tunnels,  etc.,  (claustrophobia).    Some  are  afraid  of  open  spaces  (agoraphobia).
Though the doctor has definitely said that there is nothing organically wrong with some patients,
they still think that they have some heart trouble or kidney disease or liver-complaint.  These are
all phobias of the body.

Some are afraid of anything and everything (pantaphobia).  The Americans are afraid of
the Russians (Russo-phobia).  The Russians are afraid of the Americans (Americo-phobia).  The
Frontier people of India are afraid of the tribal people (Tribal-phobia).  Phobias are endless.

The causes of phobias are nervousness,  stupidity  in  a  mild  or  intense  form  and  lack  of

Vichara or enquiry or right thinking and right understanding.

5

CONQUEST OF FEAR

Phobia is an unnatural form of fear.  A normal fear arises when one’s life is in danger
when some external object such as cobra or a tiger or situation like a riot threatens the existence
of the individual.  The fear which arises on such occasions is perfectly natural.  Man tries to save
his own life by either fight or defence.

Develop  your  will-power.    Cultivate  courage  and  fortitude.    Develop  mental  power  of
endurance, firmness in meeting danger and power of resistance.  Meditate on courage.  Live in
the company of sages and Yogis.  Meditate on the fearless Atman.  All phobias will disappear.

A person who is unable to move in the company of many people, who hates multitude,
who  is  afraid  of  seeing  many  people,  should  try  to  move  with  people  slowly,  should  have
adaptability and strength to withstand agitation of mind.  Cultivate calmness even amidst many
men and women.  Brahmacharins should try to avoid woman-phobia.  They must be fearless and
tranquil  even  in  the  midst  of  ladies.    One-sided  development  is  imperfect  development.
Development should be integral and that is equal mindedness in all conditions and at all places.

One who is afraid of walking in darkness should try to get rid of this defect by taking a
light in the beginning and walking in the night, and slowly trying to walk without light also.  Fear
will vanish in course of time.  Fear is a negative force.  It cannot stand before the positive virtue,
courage.

Abhinivesha or love for earthly life is the main cause of all fears Abhinivesha is clinging
to life and body.  Attachment to objects causes fear.  Attachment to name and fame causes fear.
Attachment to money and woman causes fear.  Any attachment is the womb of terrible fear.  One
who possesses, fears.  He does not fear who has renounced everything, who perceives the Atman
in all.

We are afraid, because we love certain things.  Love is the cause of fear.  We do not wish
to part with certain things.  And when anything obstructs our acquiring those objects of love and
desire, we are annoyed, we are afraid of that, and we lose the mental balance.  Renunciation of
everything, and cultivating Brahma-Bhava is the best remedy to overcome all fears.

Sit and introspect.  Find out the root of the trouble.  If you are not able to do this yourself,
get the help of a psychotherapist or a Yogi.  The thing that is deeply buried in your subconscious
mind should be released or dispelled.

May  you  all  be  courageous!    May  you  all  be  bold  and  cheerful!    May  you  all  radiate
courage,  strength  and  peace.    May  you  all  inherit  courage,  the  birthright  from  your  Almighty
Father, the Fearless, Immortal Brahman!

7. DO NOT GENERATE “POOCHANDI” OR “HOWA” SAMSKARAS

Mothers generate “Poochandi” Samskaras in the minds of their children.  When children
cry, when they refuse to take food, or when they do any mischief the mothers frighten them and

6

ALL ABOUT FEAR

say, “Poochandi (ghost) has come; Irandu Kannan (two eyed man) has come.  He will take you
away.”  Children  get  frightened.    The  Poochandi-samskaras  get  deeply  implanted  in  their
subconscious mind, and make them very timid when they reach adolescence.

Mind is like a sensitive plate of a camera.  Whatever is exposed to the lens is registered in
the sensitive plate behind.  Even so whatever is seen or heard is permanently impressed in the
sensitive mind-plate.

The  minds  of  children  are  very  impressionable.    They  are  very  plastic.    Mothers  and
teachers should be very careful when they deal with children.  They should not tell them anything
that  will  frighten  them.    On  the  contrary  they  should  tell  them  stories  of  chivalrous  persons,
which  will  make  them  bold  and  courageous.    Even  during  the  period  of  pregnancy,  mothers
should read inspiring books like Ramayana, Bhagavata, Mahabharata, if they wish to bring forth
intelligent and brave children.

Mothers,  fathers  and  teachers  should  have  at  least  an  elementary  knowledge  of

psychology.  Then alone can they mould the children properly.

The  sage  Madalasa  sang  the  following  cradle  song  when  she  rocked  the  cradle  of  her
children:  “Suddhosi  Buddhosi  Niranjanosi  Samsara-maya-parivarjitosi”—“O  child!    Thou  art
Pure Consciousness.  Thou art stainless.  Thou art devoid of Maya and Samsara.”  She made all
her children sages.

The world is in dire need of women-sages like Madalasa.  The destiny of the world and

children is in the hands of intelligent mothers.

8. FEAR IN VARIOUS FORMS

Fear  is  a  negative  quality  or  modification  in  the  mind.    It  is  the  result  or  product  of
ignorance.    It  manifests  when  one  identifies  himself  with  the  body  and  forgets  the  immortal
Atman, his own real Satchidananda Svarupa.  It is the old companion of Aasakti (attachment) or
Moha or delusion.  Fear, worry and anger deplete all energy of man and bring  exhaustion  and
early death.

No one is absolutely free from some sort of fear.  It is only the Jnani or a full-blown Yogi
and a Bhakta who is absolutely free from fear.  How can fear affect that sage who sees his own
Self everywhere?  If one can conquer fear, half of his Sadhana is over.

Fear assumes various forms.  The Gurkha soldier is not afraid of knife or bullet but he is
afraid of scorpions.  A hunter is not afraid of tigers in the forest but is afraid of the surgeon’s
knife.  The man of the frontier is not afraid of knife; he can even allow the surgeon to open his
intestines, without chloroform, but he is terribly afraid of snakes.  Some are afraid of ghosts.  The
vast majority of persons are afraid of public criticism.  Some are afraid of diseases.  The most
healthy and strong man has got some imaginary fear of some obscure disease.

7

CONQUEST OF FEAR

The king is afraid of his enemy.  The Pandit is afraid of his opponent.  A beautiful lady is
afraid  of  old  age.    A  lawyer  is  afraid  of  the  judge  and  his  clients.    The  wife  is  afraid  of  her
husband.    The  student  is  afraid  of  the  teacher.    The  Police  Inspector  is  afraid  of  the
Superintendent.  The frog is afraid of the snake.  The cobra is afraid of the mongoose.

There are various degrees in fear.  They are simple fright, timidity, shyness, alarm, terror
and terrible fear.  When there is terrible fear, the whole body perspires, urine and faecal matter
are  ejected  involuntarily.    The  mind  becomes  like  a  log  of  wood.    Sometimes  shock  and
immediate collapse take place and the man dies of sudden heart failure.  The face becomes pale
and the eyes express a peculiar ghastly, listless look.

Parents and teachers should infuse the spirit of courage in their sons and students from
the very boyhood.  They should ask them to read stories in the ‘Mahabharata’ which deal with
the chivalrous acts of Bhishma and other persons.  Boys have got pliable and elastic minds.  They
can be manipulated well at this period of life.  The Samskaras can be indelibly impressed at this
age.  Brahmacharya gives tremendous strength and infuses courage.

If you think of the opposite of fear, viz., courage, the negative (fear) will slowly vanish.
You will have to develop courage slowly.  Have the word-image “OM COURAGE” before the
mind.  Repeat this Mantra or formula very often.  A word is the centre of an idea.  An idea is the
centre of a mental image.  A mental image is the centre of a mental habit.  A mental habit is the
centre of a trait in man.  Have a clear-cut image in the mind of the quality of courage, and this
quality will develop.  The subconscious mind will do everything for you.  The ‘will’ also will
come to your aid.  Desire to be courageous, and the ‘will’ will immediately follow desire.

Give up attachment or this perishable body.  Do not identify yourself with this body.  This
body is like the shell of a coconut.  It is like a pillowcase.  Constantly think of the Indweller, the
immortal  Atman.    Do  Atma  Chintana  always.    Identify  yourself  with  the  Atman.    Fear  will
vanish.  This is the most powerful method.  Move about in the thick forests or dense jungles at
nights and wander about in the streets of your place without light and without guide.  The Bhakta
gets rid of fear and Deha-Adhyasa through total self-surrender.

9. TRIUMPH OVER FEAR

Fear is an instinct common in every man.  Fear is universal.  It can happen at any place.
It  can  come  at  any  time.    Even  elements  of  Nature  are  subject  to  Fear.    Wind  is  said  to  blow
through  fear  of  Him.    The  sun  rises  fearing  Him.    Indra,  Fire  and  Death  proceed  to  their
respective duties only out of fear.  Thus, fear is not uncommon in Devas, too.  Equally it prevails
amongst beasts, animals, insects and practically every creation of this world.

Fear is generally the result of pain, injury and discomfort.  There is a hereditary aspect of
this instinct which accounts for its universality and its persistence.  Factors of environment and
training  are  also  significant.    The  idea  of  some  external  superior  power  over  one’s  self  is  the
chief cause of fear.  Relatively, the mind adopts an entirely different attitude.  Vision changes.
Glaring perception fails.  The mind is not balanced.  There is some abnormality of thoughts and

8

ALL ABOUT FEAR

actions.    Hysteric  and  neurasthenic  convulsions  are  all  due  to  one  form  of  fear  or  other.
Impulsion and desire to escape or flee from the dangerous situation are the immediate results.

This fear has to be conquered.  Freedom from fear can be achieved by liberation from the
objects  of  fear.    Re-educating  the  mind,  bringing  forth  the  power  of  the  spirit,  dealing  with
practical  affairs,  diligently  putting  into  practice  the  knowledge  that  one  possesses,  are  all
essential factors to overcome fear.  It must be felt that there is no object which is to be afraid of
or to be feared.

In  all  cases,  it  must  be  distinctly  understood  that  seeing  and  hearing  alone  does  not
produce the sensation of fear.  A child is not afraid of its father or mother usually.  But when the
father puts on a strange countenance, or howls in an unnatural way the child becomes frightened.
This gets firmly rooted in the mind.  This develops as a hereditary weakness in later life also.
This memory is scarcely washed off even after growth.  So children should not be frightened.

Here fear should not be confused with startle.  School boys, when they see their master’s
head at the corner of a street, flee away.  This does not mean fear.  This is due to an instinct in
everybody to escape from the sight of the master.  On the other hand, if the master takes a cane in
his hand, the child suffers some sort of infliction and imagines impending injury.  Consequently
he fears his master.

But how to conquer fear? Whenever a child is afraid of something, we first tell him that
there  is  nothing  to  be  feared  thus  denying  the  object  of  fear.    Denial  is  the  first  step  in  the
procedure. Subsequently we explain to the child the actual thing, the Truth.  We thus convince
him that it was only his fancy which created the sensation in
him.  We  positively  affirm
and assert what is true.  Similarly, even as we grow, we must develop constantly the knowledge
that there is nothing in the universe to cause fear.  The subconscious mind, which is first startled
by an unusual sight or incoherent voice, should be kept assured that all such things are false, the
Truth behind them being well acquainted with the normal sense and knowledge.  When fear is
completely removed, nothing can hurt us.

People  in  well-lit  cities  and  urban  areas  are  still  afraid  to  move  in  darkness.    They
imagine something untoward to happen causing pain,  injury  or  discomfort.    At  the  same  time,
how many sages and Sannyasins roam about in the dark over hills and dales in the dead of night
and live in caves, the abode of beasts, insects and wasps. Dhruva Bhagat made penance in the
midst of wild beasts.  Dhruva, before he attained Youth, entered the forest and did great Tapas.
Bharata played with cubs.

Mere  re-educating  the  mind  will  not  strengthen  courage.    Putting  the  knowledge  into
practice on every occasion is quite essential.  At every auditorium we find people advocating that
what men are afraid of as snakes are but ropes.  But they fail to experience such stamina.  On the
other  hand,  they  mildly  submit.    This  is  due  to  lack  of  training.    This  is  not  what  is  required.
Well-developed knowledge coupled with practice can alone relieve men from fear.  The idea may
be paradoxical to assume that “there is nothing to fear because nothing can hurt us though the
converse is equally true.”

9

CONQUEST OF FEAR

Denying  fear,  one  can  overcome  the  object  of  fear  itself.    You  should  not  have  any
dualism in mind.  You must always develop cosmic love and universal brotherhood.  When there
is  love  and  brotherhood,  there  is  no  enmity.    There  is  no  superiority  of  power.    There  is  no
pleasure  or  pain.    Ultimately  there  is  no  fear.    Of  course,  this  is  the  stage.    The  final  stage  is
feeling  oneness  of  all.    All  are  Brahman.    All  merge  in  Brahman.    There  is  Brahman  alone
pervading throughout the universe.  There is no second thing of supremacy in the world.  There is
no second thing in His creation at all.  This knowledge entirely uproots fear and brings one into
eternal peace.  Fear does not emanate from one’s own Self.  This is the secret of it.  Knowledge
of Brahman, the eternal Truth, totally annihilates fear.

The  Truth  is  to  be  pronounced  and  meditated  upon.    Recitation  of  Upanishads,  Srutis,
Vedas and hymns produces vibrations.  These vibrations remove all inflections.  Many incurable
diseases causing fear of death in the minds of the sufferers are cured by these vibrations alone.
Thirujnana  Sambandhar,  a  Tamil  saint,  cured  a  Jain  king  of  Madura  of  his  incurable  disease.
Thirunavukkarasu  Swamigal,  another  Tamil  saint,  was  cured  of  his  stomach  disorder  only
through such vibrations.  Sakkubai was released time and often from various difficulties through
her  sincere  devotion  to  Lord  Krishna.    They  all  felt  one  with  Him.    Again,  Thirunavukkarasu
Swamigal was shut up in a lime kiln to be burnt to death.  He felt oneness with God.  His mind
was not in the least affected.  His physical body, too, was not affected by the object of fear of
death.

Drowning waves of fear may at times rush down upon us.  We may lose mental balance
for a while.  We may be over-sensitive and agitated.  A chain of evil happenings appear before us
one  after  another  in  quick  succession.    Memory  of  the  past  gallops  with  winged  speed.
Imagination  soars  and  we  picture  disaster  after  disaster  awaiting  us.    Yet,  under  all  these
circumstances, we must lay our fullest faith in God, take refuge in Him and fully believe that He
alone can deliver us.

Overcoming in this way will not suffice.  This must be brought into practice.  We must
first face only those which we are afraid of.  If a man is afraid of facing an audience, it must be
the first and foremost duty he should do until he is free from stage fear and nervousness.  If one
trembles to approach his superior or any other person who, he thinks, is endowed with superior
powers, that must be taken up as his first duty everyday till he gains sufficient moral strength.  If
someone  is  horrified  at  a  sight  in  the  dark,  instantaneously  he  must  run  over  to  the  spot  and
realize that the object which caused him fear is nothing but one of his daily handlings.

Worse than in waking, many undergo drastic, alarming abnormality in sleep.  This is all
due to loading the mind with stray thoughts while retiring.  One should never go to bed in a state
of worry or fear.  Nor with a heavy heart.  Nor when he broods over an impending evil.  Before
retiring, everyone must evacuate all such thoughts and meditate upon God till he is released from
them.  He must have perfect peace in mind and soul.  If he is unable to meditate upon God, let
him loudly recite some hymn or poem till he sinks in the bed.  He is sure to have peaceful, deep
sleep.

10

METHODS TO ERADICATE FEAR

If we meditate upon statements of Truth  our  inner  eye  of  wisdom  opens,  we  are  gifted
with right understanding, and we know the Truth.  This is worship of God.  This is adoration to
the Lord.  It is this which liberates us from bondage.

Working  mentally  and  practicing  physically  and  at  all  times,  dwelling  spiritually  upon
divine thoughts and remaining in a higher stratum of mind we not only overcome fear but merge
in Brahman.

“Whence all speech turn back with the mind without reaching; he who knows the bliss of

Brahman fears not at any time—is not afraid of anything”.—Brahmananda Valli—4.9.

METHODS TO ERADICATE FEAR

1. VICTORY OVER FEAR

(Pratipaksha-Bhavana-Method)

As  you  think,  so  you  become.    As  you  think,  so  you  develop.    As  is  your  ideal,  so
gradually  your  life  will  become.    This  is  so,  because  there  is  a  great  transforming  power  in
thought.

Take, then, the life of perfect men like Bhishma and think of their deeds and their life and
ideals.  Your life will be filled by purity, courage, etc.  You will become a noble, perfect man.
The thought will transform you into its own likeness.  Man becomes like what he worships.  Man
becomes like what he thinks.  This is indeed true.

Sit with closed eyes in the early morning.  Meditate on courage, the opposite of fear, for
half  an  hour.    Think  of  the  advantages  of  courage  and  the  disadvantages  of  fear.    Practice  the
virtue during the day.  Feel that you actually possess courage to an enormous degree.  Manifest it
in your daily life.  In some weeks or months fear will be replaced by courage.  Repeat the formula
“Om courage” mentally, daily several times.

Meditate and assert:

“I am all courage
I am an embodiment of courage
I am like Bhishma
I am a great hero
My will is very powerful
I am not afraid of anything
I am bold and chivalrous
Courage is my birthright

11

OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM

CONQUEST OF FEAR

It  is  very  difficult  to  attack  fear  directly.    It  is  very  strong.    You  are  a  victim  to  this
negative trait in hundreds of lives.  It has taken deep root.  Put the seeds of courage in your heart.
Allow it to grow.  Fear will die by itself.  The positive always overcomes the negative.  This is an
immutable psychological law.  This is the Pratipaksha-Bhavana-method of RajaYogins.  Try this
method again and again.  You are bound to succeed.

May  you  attain  triumph  over  fear  by  cultivating  courage  through  the  Pratipaksha-

Bhavana-method or the method of thinking on the opposite!

2. FEELING THE PRESENCE OF GOD

God is all-pervading.  He is always with you.  He is in you, around you.  He is not far to
seek.  He cannot be, perceived through the physical eye.  Your sense of touch cannot help you.
He has to be realized through the inner eye of wisdom.

Modern civilization has enslaved people to such an extent that they are incapable of any
original expression, thought  or  deed.    They  do  not  care  to  think  of  their  routine  actions—how
their  activities  progress,  what  they  are  running  after  or  what  goal  they  are  marching  towards.
Inventions, innovations and contrivances have eased men from their labour and human skill.  The
conservation of energy in this direction has only created laziness in them.  More sensual desires
and  perceptions  have  begun  to  sway  them.    Lost  in  the  ever-pouring  luxuries  of  life,  the  true
mission is once for all forgotten.  People do not think wherefrom their daily requirements come,
who the unfailing and non-stopping supplier is, where His abode rests, how to have His Darshan,
what to request of Him and how to revere Him.  No amount of study and research in physical
geography,  vegetable  kingdom,  various  industrial  technologies,  physiology  and  other  sciences
will  solve  these  problems  nor  even  give  a  clue  to  the  solution.    This  scientific  knowledge  is
subject  to  various  hypotheses,  axioms  and  data  which  are  by  themselves  under  controversies.
This knowledge will in no way aid one to arrive at the source.  The source is really beyond all
these conceptions.  Its abode cannot be located by running the finger over a coloured map.  The
Dweller  and  His  abode  can  be  seen  only  through  the  inner  eye  and  right  understanding.
Concentration, Meditation and Sublime Thoughts are the pathways to this abode.

Most  people  feel  themselves  unable  to  stay  their  mind  upon  God  and  meditate  upon
divine  thoughts.    This  is  all  due  to  want  of  training.    Realization  is  always  through  practice.
Practice comes out of proper training.  Proper training requires consultation of learned men.  This
is “Initiation in the right path.”

In all ages you meet with such great personalities who are always ready to help you but
who may not advertise themselves as such.  It is left to you to find out such men, to choose your
own GURU to obey him implicitly, to serve him with all sincerity and earnestness and express
your  thirst  for  knowledge.    Vain  discussions  and  intentional  test-questions  must  be  strictly
avoided.  You must be regular in your lessons and practice.

There are again persons who say that they are unable to meet even a single man of such
qualities, for their Guru.  Though it is firmly held that no perfection can be attained in any line

12

METHODS TO ERADICATE FEAR

without a Guru, it may well be asserted that God is near and dear to you as He is to everybody.
Sincere and earnest attempt will have its own fruits.  It is not on this plea the concentration and
meditation have to be cast off.

Because  a  man  does  not  understand  the  film  language,  does  he  refrain  from  visiting
films?  He avails himself of every opportunity to accompany his friend who is able to interpret
and  who  is  already  in  the  groove.    If  not  he  makes  fresh  acquaintance  while  in  the  queue  to
procure tickets.  Even this if he is unable to get he pushes himself anyway and tries his best to
decipher the whole film racking his brain.  He makes earnest efforts to improve his knowledge in
this line by purchasing synopsis, bulletins and magazines.  He is restless until he acquires some
knowledge.  At no stage does he stop and put an end to this quest of knowledge.  In due course
every actor or actress lives at the tip of his tongue.  He becomes profusely enlightened in this art.
He speaks hours and hours about the talents of various film-stars.  What are all these due to?  Is
he not training himself earnestly. honestly, sincerely and virtuously in the particular line?  Did he
wait for a Guru?  What a pity it is that a man indulges so much in trivial things discarding the
vital mission of life?

It is quite common for people to complain that when they begin to think upon God, their
mind wanders here and there and their thoughts become engaged with mundane affairs.  This is
again due to lack of training and want of definite will-power.  True.  It is very difficult, extremely
difficult to fix the mind at first  instance  upon  God.    An  entirely  different,  superior  and  higher
stratum of mind is needed for this practice.  This has to be well developed.

The mind is full of lust.  It is always restless.  It traverses through all spheres—good or
bad.  It has to be wound up by the triple cord of devotion, concentration and meditation.  It must
always be kept under control.

Try to get alone for a few minutes every day.  If you cannot afford this, utilize every scrap
of leisure you presume to enjoy.  Select a lonely place, a river bank, the top of a mount, the open
terrace of your house, a  sea  shore,  a  simple  pleasant  meadow,  a  corner  in  a  temple,  church  or
mosque or a private room.  Purge all your wavering thoughts.  This will be quite easy in any of
the  above  localities  as  all  the  senses  will  be  drawn  by  the  exquisite,  beauty  of  the  spot  or
landscape  or  by  the  deep  silence  pervading  all-round.    If  necessary,  burn  incense  or  scented
sticks, which will always keep you alert.

There are two distinctive ways for worship of God.  One, the “All-pervading Nature” and
the other “Here and here alone”.  If one is to sit down and contemplate on the omnipresence of
God,  i.e.,  presence  in  the  sun,  in  the  moon,  in  the  stars,  in  anything  and  everything  he  comes
across,  perhaps  he  might  become  lost  in  immensity.    On  the  other  hand  one  may  localize  the
presence of God at the initial stage which he may develop later into the former method.

Having steadied the mind either by gazing at a particular spot, or the picture of any form
of God or Guru or tuning the ears to the murmur of the river or receding waves of the sea, utter
slowly in a low tone the statement “GOD IS NOW HERE” or “GOD IS IN THIS ROOM”.  First
repeat “G-O-D  I-S  N-O-W  H-E-R-E” in a deep meditative way.  Then relax for a while and

13

CONQUEST OF FEAR

again repeat.  Do this untiringly till you are immersed in your statement.  Now you realize the
presence of God.

Do  not  stop  with  this.    This  is  not  the  ultimate  aim.    Existence  Absolute,  Knowledge
Absolute and Bliss Absolute are the supreme things to be aimed at.  After experiencing “GOD IS
NOW  HERE”  repeat  “HIS  PRESENCE  FILLS  ME  FROM  HEAD  TO  FOOT”.    By  repeated
utterances realize His existence in you.  In the same way practice “HIS PRESENCE IS JOY”,
“HIS PRESENCE IS LOVE” and “HIS PRESENCE IS PEACE”.  Whenever your mind attempts
to wander, repeat these statements loudly until it comes round.  Morning hours are most suitable.
This practice will free you from fear and fill you with courage, joy and peace.

If this is practiced untiringly a sense of supreme joy, Cosmic love and Eternal Peace will
reign over you.  What to speak of the radiance of such a realized Yogi?  How glorious will he
shine in the world.

May  all  know  this  easy  way  for  the  realization  of  God!    May  all  practice  this  with
definiteness and self-will.  May all share His blessings.  May all be free from worldly ties and
sensual agonies.  May the All-merciful Lord encumber them with help and relieve them from the
struggle of Samsara!

3. DEVOTION TO GOD ERADICATES ALL FEARS

God  bestows  perfect  security  on  His  devotees  and  removes  all  sorts  of  fears.    He
transforms the sense of insecurity and fear into one of confidence and faith.  He saves him from
panic and despair.

Mira was tormented by her husband in a variety of ways but Lord Krishna protected her
and removed all her fears.  The cup of poison was changed into nectar.  Cobra was changed into
Saligrama and a garland of flowers.  She was shut in a cage where there was a hungry tiger.  The
tiger did not eat her but kissed the feet of Mira.  This was all due to grace of Lord Krishna.

Lord Hari removed all the fears of Prahlada.  Prahlada also was tormented by his cruel
father.  Prahlada was thrown into the sea.  He was trampled under the feet of the elephant.  He
was rolled down from the top of a hill.  He was thrown into the fire.  But he was saved by Lord
Hari.  Lord Vishnu removed all his fears.

A devotee sees only the Lord in all names and forms.  He beholds Lord Hari everywhere.

How can there be fear, then, for him?

Take refuge in Lord, in His name and grace.  All fears will vanish completely.  He will

bestow strength, fortitude, courage, presence of mind, etc., in you.

Abandon desires, Raga-Dvesha, and all sorts of worldly attachment.  Pray and meditate:

Lord Hari!  I am Thine 

Ram Ram Ram

14

METHODS TO ERADICATE FEAR

O Lord Hari!  All is Thine
Thy will be done
Fill my heart with courage
Shower Thy grace on me
Let my mind be attached to Thy lotus feet
Let me feel Thy presence, everywhere
Let me behold Thee in all forms
Reveal Thy form to me
Guide me, protect me
Pahi Mam.  Raksha Mam

Ram Ram Ram
Ram Ram Ram
Ram Ram Ram
Ram Ram Ram
Ram Ram Ram
Ram Ram Ram
Ram Ram Ram
Ram Ram Ram
Ram Ram Ram
Ram Ram Ram

4. MEDITATION ON ATMAN

(The Method of Jnanis)

Meditation on the fearless Atman removes all sorts of fears in toto.  A sage beholds the
immortal fearless Self only everywhere.  How can there be fear for him then?  There is fear only
where there is duality.  If one feels that there is a second object besides himself, at once fear is
generated.  He is afraid of the other man.  Separation, duality, perception of objects are all due to
Avidya or ignorance.

Start  the  anti-current  from  today.    Deny  the  body,  and  identify  yourself  with  the  all-
pervading, immortal, fearless Atman.  Entire denial of the body cannot come in a day or a week.
Constantly  think  of  the  Atman.    Gradually  you  will  become  fearless.    You  will  have  to  fight
against  the  Samskaras  of  Anadikala  (beginningless  time).    The  more  you  think  of  Atman,  the
more courageous you will become.  By constant hammering only can you entirely drive the nail
into the wall or a plank.  Even so, by constant and protracted thinking on Atman alone you can
become absolutely fearless.

Meditate.  Assert.  Recognize.  Realize:

I am fearless, all-pervading Atman
I am not afraid of anything
Courage is my birthright
I behold the one Atman everywhere Everything is my own Self
Who is to be afraid of whom?
There is no duality for me
I see the non-dual essence only
My will is very powerful now
My power is irresistible
I have no enemy
Enemy, tiger, cobra, are my own Self They cannot do harm to me
I love them as my own Self

OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM
OM OM OM

A  Jivanmukta  or  a  sage  hates  none,  fears  none.    May  you  all  be  established  in  that

Supreme Non-dual Fearless Brahman.

15

