This is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book KINGLY SCIENCE 
KINGLY SECRET 
 
 
By 
 
 
SRI SWAMI SIV ANANDA 
 
 
 
 
 
Sri Swami Sivananda 
Founder of  
The Divine Life Society   
 
 
SERVE, LOVE, GIVE, 
PURIFY, MEDITATE, 
REALIZE  
So Says  
Sri Swami Sivananda  
 
     
Compiled by: 
Sri N. Ananthanarayanan 
    
A DIVINE LIFE SOCIETY PUBLICATION This is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book First Edition: 1981 
 
   
World Wide Web (WWW) Ed ition: 2006 
WWW site: http ://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
 
This WWW reprint is for free distribution 
 
This e-book should not to be 
redistributed from any other site 
 
    
©  The Divine Life Trust Society
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
  
Published By  
THE DIVINE LIFE SOCIETY 
P.O. S
HIVANANDANAGAR —249  192 
Distt. Tehri-Garhwal, Uttaranchal, 
Himalayas, India. This is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book PUBLISHERS’ NOTE
This work, a compilation from the published writings of Swami Sivananda, is in the nature
of a detailed commentary on select verses of the Bhagavad Gita. While many readers may be
familiar with the stanza-by-stanza commentary of the holy Master on the full Gita text, in this
volume they will find a considerably more detailed exposition of the implications of Sri Krishna’s
instructions to Arjuna which are as valid today as they were at the time of the Mahabharata war.
The book begins with an Introduction which deals with the goal of human life and the vital
role of religion and Yoga in the achievement thereof. Life without religion is a dreary waste andYoga is but an aid in the practice of one’s own religion. Yoga is universal and the Yoga Shastra ofLord Krishna, namely, the Srimad Bhagavad Gita , is equally universal. Yoga and the Gita are open
to all. And the Master’s most lucid, free-flowing commentary on a wide spectrum of the G itaverses
brings the secrets of Sri Krishna’s teachings to the doorstep of every English-speaking household.
The stanzas chosen cover a wide range of topics that are of immediate consequence to every
spiritual seeker. The compilation starts with subjects pertaining to spiritual Sadhana in general andthen proceeds to cover the more important topics under Karma Yoga, Bhakti Yoga, Raja Yoga andJnana Yoga in that order. The living voice of Sivananda echoes and re-echoes on every page and inevery line, casting a magic spell on the reader, rousing him at the same time to heightened efforts inthe direction of God and Truth.
A glossary is appended mainly for the benefit of the Western Yoga enthusiasts.
It gives us genuine pleasure to invite the reader to derive inspiration and profit from the
pages that follow.
The Divine Life Society
Shivanandanagar, Rishikesh, IndiaMarch 22, 1981.
PREFACE
Almighty Lord, Father of mankind, God of love and grace, I pray to Thee to bless all
beings with peace and joy. May all beings be free from sorrow and affliction! May happinessand welfare prevail in their life!
Beloved reader, peace be unto you. I consider it a rare blessing and a spiritual privilege to
write this Preface to this inspiring book, which contains the boundless love and goodwill of the
great-hearted spiritual teacher, the revered Swami Sivananda of sacred memory. The holy Master,
Swami Sivananda of Rishikesh in India, was a well-wisher of the whole world. He was thecompassionate spiritual Master of modern mankind. He was a benefactor of both the East and theWest and of both hemispheres.
iiiThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book This book brings to you his wisdom teachings, his friendship and sympathy, his spiritual
love and divine insight into your problems and difficulties. This book is the tangible fruit of his
intense desire to help all humanity, to free it from sorrow and suffering and to show it the way tohappiness and blessedness. This book comes to you filled with the holy benedictions of a saint, withthe spiritual wisdom of a sage, with the light of his inner spiritual illumination, and with theinspiration and power of his penance and inner realisation. It is a rare treasure for you. Make it yourlife’s companion. It can be your guide, friend and philosopher. Read a little daily. It will nourishyou inwardly and benefit you physically, mentally, intellectually, morally and spiritually.
The 8th of September is a blessed day to remember and rejoice upon. For, upon this day one
hundred years ago, on the 8th September, 1887, a child was born to pious parents who belonged tohighly religious families on both sides. This child was verily a boon and a blessing to mankind, forit was destined to become a cosmic friend, a benefactor of all humanity and a great spiritual teacherwhose message of selflessness, devotion, spiritual meditation and God-realisation was soon toreach every part of the globe in this present 20th century. This child grew up to become firstly, adedicated and compassionate medical doctor; then secondly, to become an illumined sage, a holysaint and spiritual Master of present-day humanity. Even as bees surround a fully blossomedflower, so too, sincere seekers, aspirants and devotees flocked to this man of God, who lived hissimple life in a humble hermitage on the bank of the holy river Ganges in the region of theHimalayan mountains. This sage and Yogi was Swami Sivananda.
He spoke to them words of spiritual guidance, inspiration and instruction. To others, who
were too far away to come to him, he wrote these teachings, radiant with the light and power of hisillumination. To him it was a labour of love, full of dedication and joy. Thus, from his humble littlecell by the sacred waters’ edge, his spiritual message and teachings flowed in all directions andreached countless seekers all over the world. These teachings covered all aspects of human life.They had but one motive or intention or objective, namely, the welfare and happiness of all humanbeings and their highest spiritual blessedness. This friend of mankind passed into the Great Beyondon 14th July, 1963. He left behind for posterity the immense treasures of his practical wisdom, toinspire, uplift and purify the reader. This book brings to you the invaluable treasure of his teachings.
To observe the 100th year of his birth, his devout disciples, followers and students are
making available to the people of the present day the treasures of his wisdom, by bringing out aseries of his publications under the auspices of his holy Birth Centenary. This present volume youhold in your hands is one such in this centenary publication series, prepared and published as ahumble token of their love, reverence and boundless gratitude to this great Master of this 20thcentury.
Human society everywhere, in this present space age and technological era, is living in fear
and anxiety of a possible (even if not probable!) nuclear annihilation. Insecurity and a feeling ofuncertainty about how one must live and strive fill the heart of modern man. This situation arisesthrough ignorance of the deeper meaning and higher purpose of existence. It is due to the neglect toacquire the elementary knowledge of the true goal of our life, of its end and means. It is due to thefailure of modern mankind to give the rightful place in our life to noble ideals and higher values andprinciples that are indispensable for sane living and sane human relationship. Due to this seriouserror, human society has created for itself a situation of great danger and much fear and
ivThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book unhappiness. All sorts of solutions have been tried. Yet man is moving deeper into ever-increasing
difficulties, because the entire problem is not merely social, economic or political. The real troublewhich human society is facing is one of ethical and spiritual poverty. It is a malaise of the spirit ofman. As such, the really effective solution is and can only be a spiritual and moral solution.
To help resolve this grave situation, the worshipful Master, Swami Sivananda, made it his
life’s mission to disseminate spiritual knowledge in order to remove the darkness of spiritualignorance and bring light upon life’s path. He strove all his life to bring about a world-wide spiritualawakening and to make man aware of the sublime goal of spiritual perfection through themanifestation of the Divinity present in every human individual. His lofty spiritual message andteachings had as their aim the presentation of the ethical ideal and spiritual goal of life by whichman can liberate himself from sorrow and fear and attain peace and happiness. He did this in acompelling manner through the force of his simple, direct way of addressing the reader through thepages of a book.
People called him variously as the Yogi of the Himalayas, The Sage of Rishikesh, The
Prophet of the New Age andThe Acharya of the Atomic Era. Be this as it may, he was without doubt
one thing for certain—a friend of all mankind and a benefactor of humanity of our present age.Therefore it is that his disciples and followers felt that one of the most appropriate ways ofobserving his Birth Centenary was to bring his message and teachings to the spiritually-minded allover the world. This would indeed constitute a most appropriate manner in which to show theirreverence to the great Master and to pay homage to his sacred memory.
These Centenary volumes have been made possible through the co-operative efforts of
various noble friends, and particularly through the great love and dedication of my spiritual brother,the revered Sri Swami Sahajanandaji Maharaj and devotees and adherents of the SivanandaAshram, Durban, South Africa who have been responsible for the editing, film-setting andfinancing of the entire project. I pray to the Almighty Lord to shower His Divine Grace upon allthose associated with this publication project of which the present volume is the result.
May the choicest blessings of worshipful Master, Swami Sivananda, be upon all and upon
you too, blessed reader! Peace be unto you and to all! May the illuminating teachings of SwamiSivananda continue to help all mankind to come out from darkness into light, from bondage tofreedom, from sorrow unto happiness, and from mortality unto immortality and divine beatitude!
Swami Chidananda (President)
Divine Life SocietySivananda Ashram, Rishikesh, India.8th September, 1981.
vThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book THE MESSAGE OF THE GITA
The teachings given by Lord Krishna are simply wonderful. He gives instructions on a
variety of subjects, but the one ringing note is: “See Me in everything. Surrender yourself to Me. Do
all actions for My sake. Cut off all sorts of attachments. Have perfect, unswerving devotion to Me.Sing My glories”.
The Lord gives you practical, wholesome guidance. Like a lotus leaf in water you should
remain at work. Feel that the Lord’s supreme power does everything here. We are all Hisinstruments. Let your hands be ever engaged in the service of the Lord in all. Let your mind be everthinking of His glories. Let your intellect discriminate correctly. And let your soul be ever in unionwith the Lord. This is Yoga. A Yogi is not an idle dreamer, an inert stone. Building castles in the airis not the Yoga that Lord Krishna asks us to practise. Beloved aspirants, give up delusion. Plunge inservice.
Yoga is not hidden in caves. It is not in thick, sequestered forests. It is not to be found in
mountain herbs. God is not a coward to run away from towns, cities and villages. He isall-pervading.
The Gita does not want you to flee from your worldly career to the solitude of the forest. It
does not bid you hide in a cave of the Himalayas for attaining the supreme peace of the Eternal. Ittells you to resist unrighteousness, to develop divine virtues and try to attain Self-realisation in andthrough the world.
Stick to your duty and to truthfulness. Do selfless service. Surrender yourself to the Lord.
Have equal vision and a balanced mind in success and failure, in heat and cold, in honour anddishonour, in pleasure and pain, in happiness and sorrow. Give the mind to the Lord and hands tothe service of humanity. Be firmly established in the vow of Brahmacharya. Give up selfishness,meanness, attachment and egoism. You will then be free from the wheel of births and deaths, fromthe bonds of Karma. You will attain supreme peace, eternal bliss and immortality. This is themessage of the Gita.
INTRODUCTION
The baby mews. The child jumps, dances and plays with toys. The schoolboy walks along
with his books. The grown-up young man gets degrees. The adolescent twists his moustache, fights,quarrels and runs after women. He tries to get name and fame. He hoards wealth. He begetschildren. Then he grows old, wears spectacles and puts on a dental set. He totters with a stick.Finally, he passes away with a hiccup.
A drop of water sprinkled on a heated iron piece produces a hissing sound and is
immediately vapourised. Man makes a little noise during the short period called his life anddisappears in a moment.
viThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book What is man? What can he become? What is the mind? What is the most desirable state? A
study of these will be really profitable.
Man is a Soul
To the Westerner, man is merely a physical creature endowed with a mind and possessing a
soul. To the Hindu, he is essentially a soul expressing himself through the mind, which has the body
as its counterpart to function upon the physical plane.
Man is a soul having a body. Man is essentially a spiritual being. Man lives because in
essence he is the spirit or soul. His innermost essence is the Atma or the Divine Spirit. His truenature is God. The physical body and the intellect depend on the soul within, about which manknows little or nothing.
Man is not this body. He is not his senses or even his mind. These are his vehicles. The body
and mind are subject to change, decay and death, whereas the real man-the immortal Self orAtma-is ever abiding never ending, eternal, unborn, perfect and ancient.
You have a body but you are not the body. You have a mind but you are not the mind. The
body and mind are your instruments like the tools of a carpenter. This body is an instrument orservant of the soul and not its prison.
Know that the body is the temple of the radiant and self-effulgent Spirit or Atma or Soul
within, which controls and moves all the faculties of the mind and the body. Know that you arebreathing the breath of the Spirit and not a physical breath.
Death does not end all. Death does not mean total annihilation. Death does not end the chain
or sequence. The working agent, the Soul in the body, does not and cannot die with the death of thebody. Man’s Soul is immortal. Just as a person lays aside his overcoat, so also he lays aside thephysical body at death.
The body is the slough of the Soul. The Soul is the mover of the body-chariot. When the
body is destroyed, the Spirit or Soul continues living. You still have your thoughts, memory,will-power and subtle body.
It is very ludicrous to believe that there is no Soul at all beyond the body. It is true that
extinction is the final stage of all “organisations”, but “consciousness” is not an organisation. It isan eternal verity untouched by change and decay. Man may change his form of individuality but hecannot change the eternal awareness which is his very existence. Behind all thoughts there is aconsciousness of thought and one cannot get behind this consciousness.
It is impossible that consciousness can ever come to an end. Hence there must be rebirth.
Otherwise, what happens to the Jiva or individual soul after it shakes off the physical body? It mustexist in a different form of consciousness suited to its further growth into greater fullness. Thatconsciousness perishes at the time of the death of the physical body is a childish idea.Consciousness is eternal and it persists beyond death.
viiThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book In man the consciousness is veiled by mind and matter. Therefore, he is not able to realise
his essential, divine nature. Unless man is liberated from the bondage of mind and matter, he cannot
have knowledge of the Self or Atma.
What is Religion?
The sole object of life is the attainment of Self-realisation or absolute freedom. The aim of
man’s life is to unfold and manifest the Godhead which is eternally existent within him. Thepurpose of life is to lose all sense of the distinctive personality and get dissolved in the Lord. Theattainment of Infinite Life is the supreme purpose of finite life.
Mundane life is all unreal. It is illusory and transitory. It is trifling and worthless. Its end is
only dust. There is nothing but tall talk, gossip, eating and sleeping. All is illusory, all is painful.Mundane experience has no value, no reality. God alone is real.
Any number of zeroes have no value unless you add 1 before them. Similarly, even if you
possess the wealth of the whole world, it is nothing if you do not lead a spiritual life, if you have nospiritual wealth, if you have no Self-realisation. You will have to live in the Soul. You will have toadd the Atma to the life here. That is the reason why Lord Jesus says: “Seek ye first the Kingdom ofGod and His righteousness, then all else shall be added unto you”.
Religion is life in God. Religion is relationship of the three fundamental principles—God,
the world and the individual. Religion gives solace to the weary pilgrim on this earth-plane, itexplains life’s mystery to him. It shows the path to the immortal abode.
Religion consists in doing good to others. It consists in the practice of love, mercy,
truthfulness and purity in all walks of life. Religion is practical philosophy; philosophy istheoretical religion. Philosophy is for ever searching, enquiring, questioning. Religion is eversensing, experiencing, realising.
Religion is not dogma. It is not a creed. Creed is only broken reed. Religion is not theology.
It is not merely a belief or emotion. It is not merely a little prayer which one offers when one suffersfrom severe intestinal colic or chronic dysentery. It is pre-eminently a life of goodness and service.It is a life of meditation. He who is loving, kind, pious and truthful, who is endowed with faith anddevotion, is truly religious.
The essence of religion is not marks on the forehead, not matted locks and long beards, not
standing in the hot sun or cold water, not the orange-coloured robe, not the shaven head, not ringingof bells, not blowing of the conch, not playing of cymbals. The essence of religion is goodness,purity and service in the midst of mundane temptations.
Religion means living in God. It is not mere discussion about God. Mere intellectual assent
cannot make you really religious. Real religion is beyond argument. It can only be lived, bothinwardly and outwardly. It is realising and becoming.
viiiThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Let not personal bias, force of convention or the opinion of fanatics and sectarians blind
your vision to a narrow view of religion. Do not be prejudiced by observing the religious practices
of the untutored masses. Through the power of pure reason and discrimination, you must be able todifferentiate the essentials from the non-essentials in religion and philosophy. Then only can you behappy. The essentials of all religions are one and the same. They all agree. Religions differ only inthe non-essentials.
A religious life is a great blessing. It lifts man from the mire of impurity and infidelity. The
intellect is vain if not illumined by religion. Religion does what philosophy cannot do. If you liveaccording to the rules of religion, you will attain wisdom, immortality, everlasting peace andeternal bliss. Religion frees one from all sorrow and pain. Religion bestows everlasting peace.Religion makes one perfect and free. Religion makes one independent. Religion unites the soulwith Brahman. Religion frees one from the round of births and deaths.
Religion is the foundation of society, the source of all goodness and happiness, the basis of
the prosperity and virtue of the individual and, through the individual, of the entire nation.Civilisation, order, unity, morality—all that elevate man and give peace to the nation—are the fruitof the practice of religion.
Take away religion, then man lives to no purpose. He stays far, far away from the purpose of
his birth. Life then becomes a dreary waste here. Really, there is no life without religion. It is onlyreligion that makes existence valuable and fills the mind with love, devotion, serenity andcheerfulness. No materialistic force can annihilate the religious urge in man though for a time acertain kind of propaganda may serve as a deterrent.
Science and Religion
Some scientists and so-called educated persons believe that science can explain everything,
can solve the riddle of the universe and all problems of life. They also think that the scientificmethod is the only method of finding out the truth, and that scientific training and discipline alonecan build very efficiently the character of man. They ignore ethical discipline, morality and religionaltogether.
One scientist came to me and said, “The Upanishads and the Brahma Sutras have not been
written scientifically. I am trying to give a scientific approach to this vital subject.”
I laughed at his remark and answered, “My dear scientist-friend, the Upanishads are
revelations. Brahma-Vidya is transcendental knowledge. The Atman also is transcendental. Youcannot take your test-tubes and spirit lamps near Him. The conclusions of the scientists cannotapproach His region. Their observations are one-sided as they concern the waking state only. Theirexperiences are only relative experiences.”
The scientist kept quiet, lowered his head in shame and walked away silently.
Three blind people touched three different parts of an elephant. One touched the foot and
said, “The elephant is like a pillar.”
ixThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book The second touched the ear and said, “The elephant is like a fan.”
The third touched the belly and said, “The elephant is like a pot.”So also, a scientist explores the physical plane and speaks of atoms, energy and physical
laws. He is also like a blind man. He has knowledge of one dimension alone. He has ignored the
dream and deep sleep states. He has no all-comprehensive knowledge.
Science has analysed man. Man is supposed to be a creature composed of various physical
and chemical substances. Yet no scientist has so far been able to assemble these constituentchemical elements of a man’s body into one homogeneous creature which lives, talks and acts like aman. And no scientist is able to comprehend the mystery of creation and the Creator and themeaning of life.
Scientists are very busy in studying the external world. They have entirely forgotten to
study the internal world. Science gives you knowledge only of phenomenal appearances and not ofthe Reality behind them. Science has not been able to solve the important questions: what is theultimate stuff of the world? Who am I? What is the ultimate truth?
Science tells us that the ultimate goal of everything is unknown and unknowable. But
Vedanta teaches that the ultimate goal is the attainment of Brahman or the Infinite, and that It can berealised through hearing of the scriptures and through reflection and meditation.
Science has its limitations also. It does not have any instrument by which it could just
collect the supersensual or spiritual data or those divine facts which exist in a subtle form and whichwe cannot see. The Soul is beyond the realm of physical science. It is beyond the reach of materialscience. It is extremely subtle. It is subtler than ether, mind and energy. Consciousness andintelligence are of the Soul and not of the body. Consciousness is evidence of the existence of theSoul. The Soul is the immortal part of man.
Science is a systematic study of facts. It tries to reduce observations or observed facts to a
system. In order that a fact may be valid for science, it must be perceptible to the senses. Sensing isfalse knowledge. Intuition is right knowledge. Intuitive knowledge alone is the highest knowledge.It is the imperishable, infinite knowledge of Truth.
A scientist is an extrovert. He bombards the atoms. He will not find pure Consciousness
there. He must withdraw the senses and rest in his own inner Self. He must dive deep into the oceanof Brahmic Consciousness.
Science is not the enemy of religion but a preparation for the latter. Science is an enemy of
superstition alone. Both science and religion are engaged in the search for Truth. Their attitudes areessentially the same but the fields of application vary.
The Hindu Rishis, seers and sages have recognised the harmonious relation between
science and religion. The divorce of science from religion is the cause of confusion and conflict.Science is religion as applied to the investigation of Truth in the finite Nature outside—the object.
xThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Religion is science as applied to the realisation of the Infinite, the Truth that underlies all
objects—the subject.
Science interprets on the phenomenal plane the One as energy. Religion interprets the One
as the Self, the Atman. Science analyses, classifies and explains phenomena while Brahma-Vidya,the Science of the Self, teaches you to transcend phenomena and attain immortality.
The scientific and the religious approaches to Truth are really complementary and not
contradictory. Religion and science are twin brothers. They should harmoniously and mutuallyhelp to search for Truth. The mind and intellect are finite instruments. They cannot realise theinfinite Reality but are the means to Its realisation. When the intellect has passed through thevarious stages of reasoning and when it has been completely purified, then revelation dawns. Truereligion begins where the intellect ends.
Let it not be thought that religion is dogmatic, otherworldly, a pet tradition of blind
believers or irrational emotionalists. Religion is the most rational science, the science of life itself,the science of man as he essentially is, not merely as he presumes himself to be. The basis of all thesecular sciences is Brahma-Vidya. Brahma-Vidya is the foremost among all sciences becausethrough its means one attains immortality. One cannot learn this science of sciences in anyuniversity. One will have to learn it from a God-realised preceptor, after having controlled thesenses and the mind.
Seek within. Stand not as a beggar before the door of science-power, which destroys more
than it heals. Do not surrender yourself to the scientists. They are not able to explain anything.Science knows nothing about the origin of life, the origin of thought and the origin and destiny ofhuman nature and the universe. There are many questions to which religion alone can give theanswers and not science.
The Bhagavad Gita
The teachings of India’s ancient seers are indeed the most universal. The works of Yoga
belong to the entire world. They are also practical to the core. Numerous persons are turning from awar-torn and sullied atmosphere to India and her ancient, divine wisdom which is found in the Gita,
theUpanishads and the Adwaita Vedanta philosophy.
Mahatma Gandhi once visited one of the largest libraries in London and asked the librarian
what spiritual book was borrowed by readers most frequently. The librarian said that it was theGita.
The greatest gift, the greatest blessing that India has conferred upon the world, upon all
humanity, is this sublime yet eminently practical, universal gospel of the Srimad Bhagavad Gita.
The greatest thinkers and philosophers of the Occident have vied with one another in paying theirdevout tribute at the shrine of the Gita. Wilhelm von Humboldt, the famous Occidental scholar,
states: “The Bhagavad Gita is the deepest and most sublime production the world possesses”.
Emerson, the great sage of America, had a copy of the Gita always on his table.
xiThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book In the midst of the battlefield of Kurukshetra, Lord Krishna, during the course of His most
interesting and instructive talk with Arjuna, revealed the profound, sublime and soul-stirring
spiritual truths and expounded to Arjuna the rare secrets of Yoga, Vedanta, Bhakti and Karma. Allthe teachings of Lord Krishna were subsequently recorded by Bhagavan Vyasa as the Song
Celestial or the Srimad Bhagavad Gita, for the benefit of humanity at large. The world is under a
great debt of gratitude to Sri Vyasa who presented this celestial song to humanity for its dailyconduct of life, spiritual uplift and Self-realisation. Only those who are self-controlled and who areendowed with faith can reap the full benefits of the Gita which is the science of the Soul.
Sri Krishna gave His Gita not merely to Arjuna, but through Arjuna, to the whole world at
large. The problems that faced Arjuna face mankind in general. The Gita is the answer to the
universal question of life as a whole.
To live means to fight, for all life is a battle wherein the forces of good and evil, the divine
and the demoniacal, purity and passion, are ceaselessly at war. The battle of Mahabharata is stillraging deep within us. Ignorance is Dhritarashtra. The individual soul is Arjuna. The indweller ofour heart is Lord Krishna, the charioteer. The body is the chariot. The senses are the horses. Mind,egoism, lust, impressions, cravings, attraction and repulsion, desires, jealousy, greed, pride andhypocrisy are our dire enemies.
The Gita symbolises the solution of this eternal struggle between the spiritual and the
material in every human being. It does not exclude any being from receiving its message andbecoming blessed. It is entirely non-sectarian and is pre-eminently a practical gospel. It embodiesin itself a solution more than just an exposition or a revelation. It embodies in itself a solution to theimmediately pressing problems of man and carries a wonderful message of hope, encouragement,cheer and consolation. It is a direct appeal to divinise the entire nature of man. It has an inspiring,workable message for you, for me and for every man and woman living his or her ordinary life inthe busy, everyday world.
The Yoga of the Bhagavad Gita is an exact science. It is a perfect, practical system of
self-culture. It is the science of right living. It has nothing to do with religious belief, colour,traditional faith, vocation or clime. Yoga is neither Eastern nor Western; it is of the world, ofhumanity in general. Krishna is not merely a Hindu God; He is the representative of the innerReality, which exists in all without difference.
TheBhagavad Gita is not merely an Aryan scripture, but also a gospel of divine life. It is the
scripture of the Yogi, and a Yogi one can be in every walk of life, at every step and stage. Even onewho aspires for Yoga is beyond the ordinary rules of human conduct and religious practice. Tobecome wider and deeper and more inclusive in one’s being and consciousness is the aim of Yoga;and this is the goal of human life.
Yoga is Universal
The idea of the novice that Yoga constitutes only physical exercises or mere Asanas and
Pranayama is a terrible error. Yoga Asanas, Pranayama, Bandhas, Mudras and Kriyas have nothingto do with real Yoga. They are aids in Yoga practice.
xiiThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Most people do not have access to Yoga beyond its physical level, because true Yoga needs
intense personal discipline, coupled with deep reflection under the guidance of an able teacher.
Yoga promises superphysical and spiritual blessings. It becomes unattractive to a common manwho clamours for immediate fruit and worldly prosperity.
Yoga is for all. It is not a sectarian affair. It is a way to God and not a creed. The practice of
Yoga is not opposed to any religion or any sacred church. It is a purely spiritual and universalscience. It does not contradict anyone’s sincere faith.
Yoga is not a religion but an aid to the practice of the basic spiritual truths in all religions.
Yoga can be practised by a Christian or a Buddhist, a Parsee, a Mohammedan, a Sufi or an atheist.To be a Yogi means to abide continuously in God, and to live at peace with others. Yoga is unionwith God. Yoga is union with all. God dwells in all.
Moral purity and spiritual aspiration are the first steps on the path of Yoga. One who has a
calm mind, who has faith in the words of his Guru and the scriptures, who is moderate in eating andin sleeping, and who has intense longing for deliverance from the wheel of this worldly existence, isa qualified person for the practice of Yoga.
An aspirant on the path of Yoga should have faith, energy, cheerfulness, courage, patience,
perseverance, sincerity, purity, absence of despondency, dispassion, concentration, aspiration,serenity, self-restraint, truthfulness, non-violence and non-covetousness. An austere and simplelife is indispensable for the practice of Yoga. The foundation of Yoga is self-control. Discipline isthe essence of Yoga, the discipline of the body as well as of the mind.
Sri Krishna’s Teachings in the Gita
The Yoga of the Bhagavad Gita is an art. You should be ever active and at the same time
feel inwardly that you are the non-doer and non-enjoyer. You should take a deep interest ineverything. And yet you should be perfectly unattached.
Sri Krishna asks man to consider himself a doll in the hands of God. He asks man to think of
himself as a soldier, with God as his general and his worldly acts as duties under orders. He asksman to act in the faith and belief that whatever he does is the work of God. He asks man to act, but toact only with devotion to Him and without desire for fruit.
The teachings given by Lord Krishna are simply wonderful. He gives instructions on a
variety of subjects, but the one ringing note is: “See Me in everything. Surrender yourself to Me. Doall actions for My sake. Cut off all sorts of attachments. Have perfect, unswerving devotion to Me.Sing My glories”.
The Lord gives you practical, wholesome guidance. Like a lotus leaf in water you should
remain at work. Feel that the Lord’s supreme power does everything here. We are all Hisinstruments. Let your hands be ever engaged in the service of the Lord in all. Let your mind be everthinking of His glories. Let your intellect discriminate correctly. And let your soul be ever in unionwith the Lord. This is Yoga. A Yogi is not an idle dreamer, an inert stone. Building castles in the air
xiiiThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book is not the Yoga that Lord Krishna asks us to practise. Beloved aspirants, give up delusion. Plunge in
service.
Yoga is not hidden in caves. It is not in thick, sequestered forests. It is not to be found in
mountain herbs. God is not a coward to run away from towns, cities and villages. He isall-pervading.
TheGita does not want you to flee from your worldly career to the solitude of the forest. It
does not bid you hide in a cave of the Himalayas for attaining the supreme peace of the Eternal. Ittells you to resist unrighteousness, to develop divine virtues and try to attain Self-realisation in andthrough the world.
Stick to your duty and to truthfulness. Do selfless service. Surrender yourself to the Lord.
Have equal vision and a balanced mind in success and failure, in heat and cold, in honour anddishonour, in pleasure and pain, in happiness and sorrow. Give the mind to the Lord and hands tothe service of humanity. Be firmly established in the vow of Brahmacharya. Give up selfishness,meanness, attachment and egoism. You will then be free from the wheel of births and deaths, fromthe bonds of Karma. You will attain supreme peace, eternal bliss and immortality. This is themessage of the Gita.
O man! you have been corrupted by wrong education. God can be neither examined in a
glass tube in a laboratory nor cut open by a surgeon’s knife. No one can prove God by means oflogic. You cannot meet God without devotion.
You are proud because of your boasted intellect and try to prove that God does not exist.
You take pride that you are Godless. What a vain, Godless man you are! You live in vain. You havewasted your life. Open your eyes now. Wake up from your long slumber of ignorance. Take refugeinGita’s Lord, Sri Krishna. Still there is hope for you. He is all-merciful. He is ready to bless you.
Study the Gita daily and live in the spirit of this divine scripture. You will soon attain eternal bliss
and immortality.
Worship the Srimad Bhagavad Gita as a holy scripture. Study a chapter of it daily.
Concentrate upon some of the verses or themes of the book. But do not stop at that. Live in the spiritof its teachings. Mere talk and lecturing will not help you in any way. You may know the whole oftheGita by heart; you may deliver lectures on it for hours together; and yet you may not have a ray
of the wisdom that the Gita propounds.
What is wanted is regular practice of the teachings of the Gita. Become intensely practical.
Let this holy scripture guide your thoughts, prompt your speech and rule your actions. Then yourwhole attitude towards life will gradually change. You will become a God-man with God-vision.You will no more be affected by success or failure, pleasure or pain, loss or gain. You will attaincourage, strength, peace and bliss in this very life, right where you are.
Glory! Glory to the Gita! Glory to Lord Krishna who has given it to the men of this world
for attaining liberation! May His blessings be upon you all! May the Gita be your centre, ideal and
xivThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book goal! Blessed is he who studies the Gita daily! Twice blessed is he who lives in the spirit of the
Gita! Thrice blessed is he who has attained Atma-Jnana or knowledge of the Gita!
—Sri Swami Sivananda
xvThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book CONTENTS
PUBLISHERS’ NOTE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii
PREFACE. . ...........................................i i i
THE MESSAGE OF THE GITA . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....................v i
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viThe Royal Science of Brahma-Vidya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................1
Faith is the First Step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...............5
The Doubter is Doomed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .....1 1
Scriptures are the Authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...............1 4
Bond Between Guru & Disciple . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16The Caste System .........................................2 2
The Glory of Swadharma. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .....2 5
All Roads Lead to Rome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .....2 9
Moderation: the Watchword in Yoga . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..........3 3
Purity of Food . . ........................................3 5
Seclusion is a ‘Must’ in Sadhana. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40The Mystery of Death . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43A Dying Man’s Thoughts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .....................4 6
Spiritual Evolution ........................................4 9
The Saint of Tomorrow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51The Play of the Gunas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53The Technique of Karma Yoga. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...........5 5
Action is Thy Duty ........................................5 7
Evenness of Mind is Yoga . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .....................5 9
Like Water on the Lotus Leaf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...........6 0
Mind to God, Hands to Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...........6 4
The Descent of God . . . . . . . . . ..............................6 5
The Rationale of Saguna Worship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .............6 7
The Four Types of Devotees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...............6 9
Bhaktas Are Above Caste & Creed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .............7 1
Practice of the Remembrance of God . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..........7 3
The Implications of Self-surrender . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .............7 4
Away With Despondency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .....................7 9
Austerity of Speech ........................................8 1
Conquest of Anger ........................................8 3
The Power of Passion. . . . . . . . . ..............................9 0
Real Austerity . . ........................................9 3
The Pull of the Senses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95The Art of Abstraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98The Conquest of Raga-Dwesha . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...............1 0 1
The Pure & Impure Minds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...........1 0 4
T h e T a m i n g o f t h e M i n d....................................1 0 8Extinction of Thoughts is Yoga . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...............1 1 1
Pleasure is the Source of Pain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...............1 1 4
xviThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Extinguish the Fire of Desire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...............1 1 7
Peace Flows From Desirelessness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..........1 1 9
The Attributeless Brahman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...........1 2 2
The Practice of Equal Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...............1 2 4
Unity of Consciousness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
Glossary .............................................1 3 0
xviiThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 1
THE ROYAL SCIENCE OF BRAHMA-VIDYA
Kingly science, kingly secret, the supreme purifier is this, realisable by direct
intuitional knowledge, according to righteousness, very easy to perform, imperishable.
(IX-2)
Brahma-Vidya is the Science of sciences. The knower of Brahma-Vidya or the Science of
Brahman or the Science of the Absolute, knows everything. His knowledge is full. He has the whole
experience through intuition or revelation. Take your firm seat on the rock-bottom of theUpanishadic truths and accept the findings of science only if they tally with the Upanishadic truths,otherwise reject them ruthlessly.
All secular sciences have their own limitations. A scientist works on the physical plane with
a finite mind and with instruments. He knows the physical laws. He has some knowledge of theelements, atoms and physical energy. His knowledge is fragmentary. He has no experience of thewhole. He has no knowledge of transcendental or super-sensual things.
Science is only a partially unified knowledge. A scientist infers, investigates and draws
exact conclusions from his observations. He understands Nature but he knows nothing of the originor destiny of Nature.
Who made the sun and gave power to its rays? Who combined four parts of nitrogen with
one part of oxygen? Who gave power to the electrons? Who gave power to the atoms to combineinto molecules? Who or what made and bestowed upon the ultimate particles of matter theirmarvellous power of varied interaction? Science does not know this great mystery. On the contrary,Yoga is completely unified knowledge. A Yogi gets inner, divine realisation. He clearly sees withhis inner Yogic eye the subtle rudiments of matter. He identifies himself with the Supreme Beingwho is the Lord of Prakriti or matter. He gets control over the five elements. He clearly understandsthe whole mystery of creation through direct intuitional knowledge. The scientist lacks this sort ofknowledge. He has only experimental knowledge.
In the matter of evidence in psychological questions, the sense-perceptions with which
science naturally deals are only second-rate criteria and are therefore to be received with caution.The closing of the external channels of sensation is usually the signal for the opening of the psychicand, from all evidence, it would seem that the psychic sense is more extensive, acute and in everyway more dependable than the physical.
The business of science is generalisation of phenomena; it is the function of philosophy and
Yoga to explain. Religion is the practical aspect of philosophy. Philosophy is the rational aspect ofreligion. The scientist tries to answer the “how” of the problem; the philosopher and the Yogiattempt to answer the “why” of it. It is a mistake to say that such and such an event occurs becauseof certain laws of Nature. The laws of Nature do not give any real explanation of the phenomena. A
1This is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book law of Nature is simply a statement, in terms as general as possible, of what happens under given
circumstances in a natural phenomenon. Science is only concerned with the phenomena. Scienceshows a marvellous harmony of Nature. But it is the problem of philosophy and Yoga to solve the“why” of Nature’s harmony.
Scientists possess a partial knowledge of the universe. They have not understood the whole
code of Nature’s laws. They have no knowledge of the occult side of things. They have noknowledge of the astral, mental and higher planes such as Brahma-Loka or the world of Brahma.The unseen world is of far greater importance than the sense-universe which is visible to the nakedeye. A fully developed Yogi can function on all planes and so he has full knowledge of themanifested and the unmanifested Nature. The senses, by which you get a knowledge of the externalobjects, are not fully developed. Therefore, the knowledge obtained is partial. The external sensesare exact counterparts of the internal astral senses. Scientists have no knowledge of the subtlerudiments of matter. Life will become fuller and richer when one develops this inner eyesight by thepractice of Yoga. Just as blood, when seen under the microscope, reveals many mysterious things,such as leucocytes, nuclei, pigment, germs and bacilli, so also the inner Yogic eye reveals many amystery to the hidden side of things. The knowledge of the scientists is only fragmentary or partial,whereas the knowledge of the Yogis who have realised the Truth is full and perfect.
In its outlook, science differs radically from philosophical musings. Consequently, the
mode of approach of science to its specific problems is different from that of philosophy. Yet thereis some similarity in the findings of both science and philosophy when some broad questions arediscussed.
Scientists have to learn many things from the seers of the East. Who gave power to the
electrons to revolve? What is at the bottom of these electrons? Who gave life to the cell or theprotoplasm? Who gave intelligence to the cells to secrete milk or bile or gastric juice from theblood? The scientists are still observing and experimenting. They are still groping in darkness.What is the cause of the origin of an impulse? Who is the director of the mind? What is the cause ofthe origin of thought? Even if all the living scientists were to put their heads together to solve thesequestions, they cannot give definite and conclusive answers.
The mind of a scientist cannot work on higher spiritual planes. It is gross and impure. It has
outgoing tendencies. It is filled with desires, passions and worldly impressions. The scientistcannot look within, introspect and meditate. He can analyse the atoms of different elements but hecannot do self-analysis. He can bombard the atoms, watch the movements of the electrons andmake discoveries in Nature. But the mind of a Rishi or a Yogi is subtle and pure. It is free fromworldly desires and passions, from selfishness, lust and hatred. It is equipped with the instructionsof the sages and the Srutis. It is filled with purity. It is free from outgoing tendencies. It is fit fordivine contemplation. It is properly disciplined in a variety of ways through rigorous austerity andself-restraint. The Yogi undergoes a discipline, a rare discipline—through the practice oftranquillity of mind, control of the senses, restraints, internal and external purification, etc.—whichcannot be had in the universities.
The scientist observes the physical phenomena, makes experiments and goes from the
effects to the cause. The Rishi or the Yogi goes directly to the cause or the source. He dives deep
2THE ROYAL SCIENCE OF BRAHMA-VIDYAThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book into the source and brings forth the pearl of knowledge of the Self. The man of science sees and
observes things only as they appear to be to his sense-perception. The seer perceives them as theyactually are in their very essential nature. He has direct intuition and perception of the Truththrough Nirvikalpa Samadhi. Then he comes to the effect—the manifested universe. Therefore, hisutterances are infallible. They are gospel truths. The Srutis of the Upanishads are direct revelations.
They are the infallible utterances of the seers or sages. They are beyond questioning, beyond theleast shadow of doubt.
When the Yogi attains the knowledge of the Eternal, he acquires the knowledge of all
secular sciences as well, because all sciences hang upon Brahma-Vidya. If you have knowledge ofclay or thread or gold, you will have knowledge of all the modifications of clay or thread or gold.
Scientists are also Adwaitins or non-dualists. They say: “There is only one substance in this
world. That is electron. The whole world is a mass of energy.” Energy is the God of the scientists.Energy is the God of the Shaktas also. Scientists have explored the physical world. They havefound out numerous methods to control the physical forces of Nature. Psychologists areexperimenting on the mental plane. They are trying to control the mental forces. Psychology is abranch of Raja Yoga which deals with the control of the mind. A close study of the observations andrevelations of science brings a man closer to God. Who has framed the laws of Nature? Nature isblind. What is that intelligence which moves Nature? Who is the primum mobile? A study of the
physical forces and the physical laws, and an understanding of the mental forces and the mentallaws, are not sufficient to make us perfect. We should have a thorough knowledge and realisation ofthe substratum that lies hidden behind these names and forms and all physical and mentalphenomena. Then only will we become perfect masters or full-blown adepts or Arhats or Buddhas.
Can scientific inventions make us really happy? That is the question of questions now.
What has science done to us? No doubt it has added a fund of knowledge on the physical plane. Butthis knowledge is mere husk when compared to the knowledge of the Self—Brahma-Vidya. Allsciences are founded on the knowledge of Atman.
Those who have fallen into the clutches of science dislike Sandhya and prayer. They neglect
the study of the Gita, Japa, Kirtan and meditation. Even if there is a study class, a discourse on theUpanishads, common prayer and meditation in an adjacent hall, they will continue their smoking,
drinking and card-playing or other game in the next room. They will be busy with their raffletickets, ranger tickets and worthless talk and gossip. What an unfortunate and deplorable state!
English-educated people are carried away unduly by scientific theories and discoveries.
Anything, however stupid it may be, when stamped by the seal of science, is regarded as gospeltruth. A theory or doctrine, however fallacious it may be, is accepted as true wisdom for all ageswhen it is proclaimed in the name of and on the authority of science. Even if some fantastic andludicrous statements are made with the stamp of science by a Haekel, an Einstein or a Tyndel,people are quite ready to swallow them with great avidity. Such is the fashion of the day! Theyreject as base superstition the sublime teachings of the ancient Rishis and sages. The brains of theseso-called educated and cultured people need a prompt, drastic and thorough flushing for aprotracted length of time. The poison has percolated into their very cells and tissues.
3KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book I do not mean to condemn the wonderful discoveries and inventions that modern science has
contributed to the vast store of knowledge and happiness which the present generation enjoys. The
radio, the aeroplane, the microphone and other marvels of science are bound to baffle humanintelligence. Scientists have found ways to fertilise an ovum with chemicals, without the aid ofsemen. It is a stupendous success. Some children are also born. They inject the semen that isobtained from renowned and cultured men of the world in order to improve the race. They areattempting to fix a radio in a match-stick. They are trying to get the necessary nutrition into thebody by pressing an electric button so that eating and defecation may be entirely abandoned. Theyare endeavouring to make the streets move so that there will be no necessity of motor cars andcarriages. They are trying to establish a means of communication with the planet Mars. They may
succeed in all their attempts. May God bless them with roaring success in all their undertakings!But the question is: can all these comforts and scientific discoveries and inventions giveimmortality, eternal satisfaction and everlasting peace? Have these material comforts enhancedhuman happiness? Is not man more restless today than ever before? Is he not more dissatisfied anddiscontented despite all these comforts? Life has become more complex and intricate. Luxuries areincreasing day by day. Even a rich man finds it difficult to make both ends meet.
There is only one remedy for all these ills. You will have to abandon all luxuries and go back
to simple, natural living if you want to enjoy real and lasting happiness. Immortality can be attainedonly by realising the Self through simple living, practice of Yoga, self-control, mental disciplineand meditation.
Why do you read many books? It is of no use. The great book is within your heart. Open the
pages of this inexhaustible book, the source of all knowledge. You will know everything. What isthis knowledge by knowing which you will know everything? This is the knowledge of Brahman orthe ultimate Reality. This is Para-Vidya. This is Brahma-Vidya. This is the science of sciences.Close your eyes now. Withdraw your senses. Still the mind. Silence the bubbling thoughts. Makethe mind waveless. Merge deep into the Atman, the Self, the Supreme Soul, the Light of lights, theSun of suns. All knowledge will be revealed to you. You will have divine wisdom. All doubts willvanish. All mental torments will disappear. All hot discussions and heated debates will terminate.Peace, bliss, eternal happiness and knowledge alone will remain.
Brahma-Vidya or the Science of the Self is not a subject that can be understood and realised
by mere intellectual study, reasoning or ratiocination, or even by discussions and arguments. Merescholarly erudition and vast study with a high degree of intelligence alone cannot help one in thepractical realisation of the Truth inculcated in this science. It demands perfect discipline, adiscipline that is not to be found in our modern universities and colleges. It demands solid Sadhanafor the achievement of the goal that is indicated by this Para-Vidya or highest science.
One has to reach a realm where there is neither light nor darkness, neither east nor west,
neither gain nor loss—a realm which can never be reached either by the mind or the senses, it is not,my dear brothers, an imaginary region of the Arabian Nights or the Midsummer Night’s Dream. No,
certainly not. It is not an illusory or chimerical place of one’s mythological fabrication. It is the oneand the only real, everlasting abode of perennial peace and deep, abiding joy, wherein thisfluctuating, restless mind can find a permanent rest. Sages like Sankara, Dattatreya, Mansoor,
4THE ROYAL SCIENCE OF BRAHMA-VIDYAThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Madalasa, Gargi, Chudalai, Jesus and others reached this destination after strenuous struggle and
exertion.
The possibility of reaching the same level is within the reach of all who are ready to struggle
hard with patience, perseverance, iron determination and strong will. What one has achieved can beattained by another. This is the grand law of Nature. Prakriti is quite unbiased. A man under normalconditions has to take countless births before he attains perfection or knowledge of the Self. If aman is sincere in his spiritual Sadhana, he can evolve quickly; he can hasten his spiritual progress ina few births which otherwise would take thousands of years. He can cut short the cycle of births anddeaths by means of drastic Sadhana, great self-control and determined effort. He can haveSelf-realisation within the twinkling of an eye in one birth if he is a first-class aspirant withextremely good spiritual impressions.
Stand up, O Prem! Follow me. Enjoy the bliss of Atma. The river of Atmic joy is flowing all
round. There is a deluge of the bliss of the Self. Drink this nectar to your heart’s content. Care notfor the world. Go thy own way. Let others hoard wealth and become mill-owners andmulti-millionaires. They are misers only. Let others become barristers, high court judges andministers. They are still ignorant men. Mind not a bit. The wealth of the three worlds is nothing,mere straws, before the spiritual wealth, the wealth of Atma-Jnana. The joy of the three worlds is amere drop when compared to the ocean of bliss of the Self. The knowledge of all secular sciences ismere husk when compared to the knowledge of the Self. Here are the priceless treasures of Atma forthee. Here is the inexhaustible wealth of Brahma-Jnana. Enjoy these riches. No dacoit or robber canrob thee of this imperishable wealth of divine knowledge. There is no insolvency, no failure of thebank, no bankruptcy here. Take possession of this great spiritual treasure, the splendour ofBrahman, and enjoy it for ever and ever. Thou art now a real King of kings, Shah of shahs, Emperorof emperors. The gods, Indra and Brahma, will be jealous of thee now, O Prem! Go and distributethis imperishable wealth of knowledge of the Self far and wide.
Glory unto thee! Peace be with thee for ever and ever!
2
FAITH IS THE FIRST STEP
The man who is full of faith, who is devoted to it, and who has subdued the senses
obtains this knowledge; and, having obtained this knowledge, he goes at once to the supreme
peace.
(IV-39)
Shraddha is faith. Faith is the greatest thing in the world. Even the highest rationality has
faith as its background. One cannot ratiocinate on things in which one has no faith. Even the
greatest philosopher has faith as his stronghold. No intellectualism can prove good if it is notsupported by faith. The whole world stands on faith and is guided by it. Religion has faith as its root.
5KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book One cannot prove God if one has no faith in God. God is only a matter of faith. This faith is the
outcome of previous spiritual impressions. Certain men are born philosophers and certain others donot grasp the fundamentals of religion even at the age of seventy. This is all due to the past spiritualimpressions. Faith is guided by the impressions of actions done in the previous births and thepresent faith is nearer or farther away from the Truth in accordance with the advance made inspiritual evolution.
Blind faith should be turned into rational faith. Faith without understanding is only blind
faith. Devotion is the development of faith. Knowledge is the development of devotion. Faith leadsto the final spiritual experience. Whatever a person strongly believes in, that he experiences andthat he becomes. The whole world is a product of faithful imagination. If you have no faith in theworld, the world does not exist. If you have no faith in sensual objects, they will not give youpleasure. If you have no faith in God, you will never reach perfection. Wrong faith turns evenexistence into non-existence.
“One who thinks that Brahman does not exist, himself becomes non-existent”, states the
Taittiriya Upanishad. Faith is the fundamental necessity for spiritual Sadhana.
Faith in God is the first step to God-realisation. Not an iota of progress is ever possible on
the path of spirituality without faith. The faith must be a living faith. It must be unwavering faith.Lack of faith is a stumbling block on the path of realisation.
Faith is an important qualification for an aspirant on the path of spirituality. Students of all
Yogas, whether of Karma Yoga, Raja Yoga or Jnana Yoga, should possess this fundamental virtue.No faith, no devotion. No faith, no Jnana. The Sanskrit equivalent of faith is “Shraddha” or“Visvas”. The student should have faith in the existence of God, in the teachings of his Guru, in theVedas and in his own self. The whole world runs on faith only. The Raja has faith in his Dewan. The
husband has faith in his wife. The shopkeeper has faith in his customers. The patient has faith in hisdoctor. The client has faith in his lawyer. The engineer has faith in his head clerk.
Man lives by faith. When faith is directed to God, it becomes the cause of the liberation of
the individual.
Faith is one of the important items in the Shad-Sampat or sixfold virtue of the “four means
of salvation” or Sadhana Chatushtaya on the path of Jnana. Even Patanjali Maharishi, the exponentof the Raja Yoga philosophy, lays much stress on faith.
Patanjali says, “Shraddha veerya smriti samadhi prajna-purvaka itaresham—To others this
Samadhi comes through faith, energy, memory, concentration and discrimination of the Real”. Hehas placed faith at the very beginning of this verse. He has given prominence to it. If a man has faith,then energy and memory come by themselves. He will collect all his energies and remember theultimate essence and exert to realise the basic Reality.
The Srutis emphatically declare: “Shraddha bhakti dhyana yogadvai hi—Know Him by
faith, devotion and meditation”. Faith comes first. Without faith you cannot practise eitherconcentration or meditation.
6FAITH IS THE FIRST STEPThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Self-realisation is a transcendental experience. You can march on the spiritual path only by
placing implicit faith in the words of sages who have realised the Truth and have attained
knowledge of the Self.
Kannappa, the hunter of Kalahasti, had true, living faith in Lord Shiva. He gave as his daily
offering the flesh of the wild beasts to the Lord. Shiva tested the sincerity of Kannappa one day.Tears fell from His right eye in the Shiva-Linga. Kannappa was sorely moved. He plucked out hisright eye and fixed it in the right eye of the Shiva-Linga. The next day there were tears in theLinga’s left eye. Kannappa plucked out his left eye and fixed it in the Linga. At once Lord Shivaappeared before him and blessed him. Kannappa had new eyes immediately and attained thekingdom of Lord Shiva-Kailasa—the abode of immortality and eternal bliss. You should possessthe same unshakable living faith which Kannappa had. Then only can you enjoy the everlastingpeace of the Eternal.
Prahlada was persecuted by his father in a variety of ways. He was rolled down from the
summit of a mountain. He was made to be trampled under the feet of an elephant. He was throwninto the sea. He was put into a large vessel which contained boiling oil. Cobras were thrown at him.Poison was administered to him by his own mother. And yet Prahlada did not lose his faith in LordNarayana. He was clinging to Lord Hari tenaciously like a leech. His faith was unflinching andunshakable. Such must be the faith of aspirants of the Lord.
You will be tested by the Lord in various ways. Even under extreme trials and difficulties
you should not lose your faith. Faith is your sheet-anchor.
It was their unswerving faith that made the two boy-devotees—Prahlada and
Dhruva—immortal. The achievements of Viswamitra Rishi in his austerities and Yoga, the successof Napoleon in the field of battle, the attainments of Mahatma Gandhi in his Karma Yoga andpractice of self-restraint, the awe-inspiring majesty and the soul-stirring magnanimity, grandeurand nobility of great personages like Tulsidas, Ramdas, Sankara, Dattatreya, Vamadeva and JadaBharata were all due to the work of that simple secret called faith.
Faith is a rare flower of inestimable value. It must be cultivated in the garden of your heart.
It must be nourished daily with the water of sincerity. The weeds of doubts and misgivings shouldbe totally eradicated. Then faith will strike deep root, blossom and bear the fruit of devotionquickly.
You cannot achieve anything grand, meritorious and sublime with a weak and wavering
faith. You cannot reach the goal of life with a faith that flickers at every step. You cannot ascend thesummit of Nirvikalpa Samadhi with an impotent and passive faith. Your faith must be as firm as theHimalayas or the Sumeru mountains. It must be as steady as the lamp that burns in a windless place.
Faith can be strengthened through Satsang, prayer, self-purification, meditation and study
of scriptures. You can ascend the rungs of the spiritual ladder with the help of intense, unflinchingfaith alone. Whenever doubts assail you, reject them ruthlessly. Open your heart to the DivineLight, the source of all knowledge, all light. Become as simple as a child. Pray from the bottom ofyour heart. The flame will again become brighter and brighter.
7KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Reason is impotent. Faith is omnipotent. A devotee with faith can enter the innermost
chambers of the Lord as Sudama did.
Do you not take for granted many things in geometry? The teacher says, “A line has length
but no breadth. A point has position or space but no magnitude.” Is this really correct? Do you argue
these points in any way? You simply take them for granted. Is this not blind faith? Then again, howdo you know that this man is your father? Your mother only knows your real father. She points out,“He is your father.” You accept it. Is this not blind faith?
Though you are not able to see the sun on account of the clouds, the sun exists. Though you
are not able to see the mind that is hidden in the brain, the electricity in the wires, the child in thewomb, the butter in the milk, the fire in the wood, yet the mind, electricity, child, butter and fire doexist. Even so, though you are not able to see God who lies concealed in these forms, on account ofthe impurities in the mind, God does exist.
Although we cannot see the stars during the day, we know that there are stars. Even so,
though we cannot see God with these physical eyes, we can infer that He is hidden behind thesenames and forms.
Brahman or the Self or the immanent God cannot be demonstrated as He is beyond the reach
of the senses and the mind. But His existence can be inferred by certain empirical facts or commonexperiences in daily life.
A lady once had a fall from the third storey of a building. On the ground there was a bed of
sharp angular stones. She would have received serious injuries but was miraculously saved. Sheherself expressed, “I felt a warm embrace by some invisible hands. Some mysterious power savedme.” Instances like these are not uncommon.
An advocate had no faith in God. He developed double pneumonia. His last breath stopped.
His wife, son and relatives began to weep. But he had a very mysterious experience. Themessengers of the God of Death caught hold of him and took him to their court. The God of Deathsaid to his messengers, “This is not the man I wanted. You have brought the wrong person. Sendhim off.” The man began to breathe after one hour. He actually experienced that he had left thebody, gone to the court of the God of Death and again re-entered the physical body. Thisastonishing experience changed his entire nature. He developed intense faith in God and became aspiritual man. He is still living in the United Provinces.
Another advocate had a similar experience but there was a little difference. He also was an
atheist. He was taken to the court of the God of Death. This advocate said, “I have not finished mywork on the physical plane. I have still some more useful work to do. Kindly spare my life now.”His boon was granted. He was struck with wonder by this strange experience. His nature also wascompletely changed. He left the legal profession at once. He is now devoting the remaining portionof his life to selfless service and meditation. He is still living in South India.
Damaset, the father of Namdev, used to visit the temple of Vittoba at Pandharpur every day
and worship Him with fruit and rice. He went to a neighbouring village one day on some urgent
8FAITH IS THE FIRST STEPThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book business. Gonabai, the mother of Namdev, gave the fruit and rice to Namdev and asked him to go
and offer them to Vittoba. Namdev took the articles of worship and placed them before the image ofVittal or Lord Krishna and requested the Lord to eat the same. When he found that the image wassilent, he wept bitterly in acute agony. Then Vittal appeared in human form and actually ate theoffering in order to please His child-devotee. Faith and devotion can work wonders. The Lordbecomes a slave of His devotees.
Feel the help from the invisible hands of God during worldly activities. The Lord is always
with you. He is watching all your activities and thoughts. Children sometimes fall from the upperstoreys of buildings and are miraculously saved. In motor car accidents and various othercatastrophes, people are saved in a mysterious manner through timely help from the invisible handsof the hidden power of God. Every one of you might have had this kind of experience. When you arein great difficulty, He sends you money in a very mysterious manner from some unexpected source.You feel His Presence and His invisible hands. But you forget Him immediately when your pocketis full.
Do not argue. You will not gain anything. Sit before your spiritual preceptor or a Mahatma
quietly and meditate for an hour. Let the soul speak to the Soul. All your doubts will be cleared bythemselves. You will have good experiences. You will enjoy a peculiar peace. There will be a holythrill of joy in your heart. This is the way for your spiritual growth.
Follow not the voice of the mind. This voice will delude you. Follow the voice of the soul.
This voice will lift you up and take you to the goal.
When you hear lectures or discourses that disturb your faith, that make your faith flicker,
leave the place at once. Do not keep company with such people till you have grown, till you areestablished on the rock of divine love. Never budge an inch from your present position. Standadamant on the bedrock of faith. May you have the intense living faith of Prahlada!
Abandon all sorts of wrong beliefs, superstitions, weaknesses, wrong notions and ideas of
impossibilities. Cling fast to faith in divine possibilities. Have faith in divine life. Aspire ferventlyand constantly to live in the Divine.
Have faith in God. Have a proper understanding of the scriptures. If ignorant people with
impure hearts and perverted intellects read the Gita, Ramayana orBhagavata, they will only try to
find out mistakes through their habit of fault-finding. They will begin to discuss useless points suchas: “Why did Rama kill a Sudra who was practising austerities in the forest? Is this justifiable? Whydid Krishna do this and that? Why did the Avatara commit such mistakes?” Such people will not bebenefited by the study of scriptures. Their minds are like a sieve. They will omit the essence that hasto be grasped and misconstrue things. They see things in a wrong light. Only those who havepurified their minds will be able to understand the real significance of the teachings of thescriptures.
Lord Rama killed a Sudra. The Sudra deserved such capital punishment because he
murdered the son of a Brahmin. Rama did this act to maintain law, order and righteousness. Canyou find any fault with the ruler of this universe, who is omniscient, who is the dispenser of the fruit
9KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book of actions according to the nature of the Karmas of Jivas? Some orthodox and narrow-minded
persons twist the truth and play mischief. It is priestcraft and religious cheating.
Lord Rama is the Supreme Soul, the silent witness, the protector of all beings. He is
omniscient, omnipotent and omnipresent. He is Lord Hari. He is never born. He never dies. LordHari simply manifested in the form of Rama to uplift the world and then vanished. He had a body ofconsciousness though to all appearances it looked like flesh. Remember this; understand this pointclearly.
It is simply foolishness to bring Lord Rama or Lord Krishna to the level of ordinary human
beings and to argue as to whether their acts were justified or not. There are some idle people who,for the sake of curiosity, indulge in such talk just to while away the time in unnecessary discussionsto show that they are also learned and religious-minded.
People of this kind do not do any kind of Sadhana. They have no dispassion and waste their
time in idle gossiping. They lack faith in God and in His Lilas. There is no practical Vedanta thesedays. There is only Vedantic gossiping. It is blasphemy to say that Lord Rama did a wrong act. Areal aspirant will never indulge in such frivolous talk. Time is fleeting. Every moment must be wellutilised in His worship and service. There is no use arguing. You must do something practical andcross this ocean of infatuation in this very birth. Religion is realisation. We must live an idealspiritual life every second. Whenever friends indulge in such topics, turn a deaf ear, keep silent orleave the place immediately. You will then experience peace. You will save much time for yourspiritual Sadhana.
Religion is not for discussion around a club table. Religion is faith for knowing and
worshipping God. Religion is practical life in the eternal Atman through earnest, protractedSadhana for years, after withdrawing the turbulent senses from sense-objects and controlling themind.
Just as coloured water penetrates freely and nicely a piece of pure white cloth, so also the
instructions of a sage can penetrate and settle down in the hearts of aspirants only when their mindsare calm, when there are no desires for enjoyments and when the impurities have been destroyed.That is the reason why an aspirant is expected to possess the qualifications of discrimination,dispassion, self-restraint, faith, withdrawal of the senses and calmness before he practises hearingof the Srutis, reflection and meditation. Discipline and purification of the mind and the senses arethe prerequisites for an aspirant on the path of Truth and God-realisation.
Even when God is explained, those who have not been purged of their faults and impurities
either disbelieve or misbelieve it, as was the case with Indra, Virochana and others. Therefore,knowledge arises only in him who has, by means of austerities performed either in this birth or inmany previous births, purified himself. The Sruti says: “To that high-souled man whose devotion tothe Lord is great, and whose devotion to his preceptor is as great as that to the Lord, these secretsexplained become illumined”.
Lord Hari manifested in the forms of Lord Krishna and Lord Rama for the protection of the
good, for the destruction of the evil-doers and for the sake of firmly establishing righteousness.
10FAITH IS THE FIRST STEPThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Lord Krishna says in the Gita: “The foolish disregard Me when clad in human semblance, ignorant
of My supreme nature, the Great Lord of all beings”. Study the Gita, Ramayana, Bhagavata and
other scriptures and have a proper understanding. Do not be carried away by the turbulent senses,
by the influences of your useless friends and idle discussions. By devotion and faith know Him inessence and, through His Grace attain supreme bliss, supreme peace and supreme knowledge. MayGod bless you!
3
THE DOUBTER IS DOOMED
The ignorant, the faithless, the doubting self, goes to destruction; there is neither this
world nor the other, nor happiness for the doubting.
(IV-40)
Belief in God is an indispensable requisite for every human being. It is a sine qua non.
Owing to the force of ignorance, pain appears as pleasure. The world is full of miseries, troubles,difficulties and tribulations. The world is a ball of fire. The fourfold mind (mind, intellect, ego andsubconscious mind), charged with attraction, repulsion, anger and jealousy, is a blazing furnace.We have to free ourselves from birth, death, old age, disease and grief. This can be done onlythrough faith in God. There is no other way. Money and power cannot give us real happiness. Evenif we exercise suzerainty over the whole world, we cannot be free from care, worry, anxiety, fearand disappointment. It is only faith in God and the consequent God-realisation through meditationthat can give us real, eternal happiness and free us from all kinds of fear and worry which torment usat every moment. Faith in God will force us to think of Him constantly and to meditate on Him, andwill eventually lead us on to God-realisation.
Belief in God and God-realisation will give us supreme peace. In that peace comes the
extinction of all pains. We will be bewildered no longer. We will be released from bondage toactions. We will become immortal. We will obtain divine wisdom. We will reach a place whencethere is no return to this world of miseries, our sins being dispelled by divine wisdom. Our mindswill ever remain balanced. We will neither rejoice on obtaining what is pleasant nor feel sorry onobtaining what is unpleasant. We will have a calm inner instrument (the fourfold mind). We will beever established in the Divine Consciousness. We will get happiness exempt from decay. We willbecome one with God and get eternal, infinite, unbroken bliss. When we are established in theDivine Consciousness we will not be shaken even by heavy sorrow. We will get happiness beyondthe reach of the senses.
God will give us full security if we worship Him with unswerving devotion and undivided
attention. He will give us the Yoga of discrimination to enable us to reach Him easily. Out of purecompassion for us, He destroys the ignorance-born darkness by the shining lamp of wisdom. Hespeedily lifts us from the ocean of worldly existence if we fix our minds on Him steadily withdevotion and faith. We will cross over the three qualities and, liberated from birth, death, old age
11KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book and sorrow, drink the nectar of immortality. By devotion and faith we will know Him in essence and
will enter into His very Being. Through His Grace we will overcome all obstacles.
If we have no faith in God, we will be born again in this world and undergo considerable
misery. The ignorant, faithless, doubting self goes to destruction. He cannot enjoy the leasthappiness. Neither this world nor that beyond is there for the doubting self. Those who have no faithin God do not know what is right and what is wrong. They have lost the power of discrimination.They are untruthful, proud and egoistic and are given to excessive greed, wrath and lust. They hoardmoney by unlawful means and become men of demoniacal nature. They commit various kinds ofatrocious crimes. They are thrown into demoniacal wombs. They sink into the lowest depths,deluded birth after birth.
An aspirant begins to doubt whether God exists or not, whether he will succeed in his
God-realisation or not, whether he is doing his practices rightly or not. Lack of faith is a dangerousobstacle on the spiritual path. The student slackens his efforts when these doubts appear. Maya, theillusory power of God, is very powerful. Mysterious is this Maya. It misleads people throughdoubts and forgetfulness. The mind is Maya. It deludes people through doubts. Sometimes theaspirant gives up his Sadhana altogether. This is a serious mistake. Whenever a doubt tries tooverpower any student, he should at once take recourse to the company of Mahatmas and remainwith them for some time under the influence of their spiritual currents. He should clear his doubtsby conversing with them.
Generally, an aspirant commences Sadhana with the expectation of so many Siddhis within
a short time. When he does not get them, he gets dejected and stops his practices. This is the troublein almost all cases. He thinks that the Kundalini will be awakened within six months and he willhave clairvoyance, clairaudience, thought-reading and flying in the air. He entertains so manyfantastic and romantic ideas.
In the mind there is doubt. There is reality also. A doubt arises as to whether there is a God
or not. This is termed Samsaya-Bhavana. Another doubt crops up whether one can realise Brahmanor not. Then a third voice says, “God or Brahman is real. He is a solid, concrete Reality, just like anamalaka fruit in the hand. He is a mass of knowledge and Ananda. I can realise Him.”
If we have clearly understood something the ideas of that thing are well-grounded and
ingrained. Some ideas are hazy and not firm. They come and go. We will have to cultivate ideas andground them till they are firmly fixed and implanted. Clarification of ideas will remove perplexityand confusion in the mind.
When a doubt arises as to whether there is a God or not, whether one will succeed in
Self-realisation or not, it must be dispelled by means of well-directed, strong suggestions andaffirmations such as: “It is true. I will succeed. There is no doubt of this. In my dictionary, in myvocabulary, there are no such words as ‘can’t’, ‘impossible’ and ‘difficult ’.”
Everything is possible under the sun. Nothing is difficult when you firmly make up your
mind. Strong determination and firm resolution will bring sanguine success in every affair orundertaking.
12THE DOUBTER IS DOOMEDThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book There are various kinds of impurities in the mind. It takes a long time for purification of the
mind and for getting it one-pointed. Concentration is a question of practice over several lives.
Concentration is the most difficult thing in the world. One should not get dejected after somepractice for some months or for one or two years. Even if you do a little Sadhana, the effect will bethere. The spiritual impressions will be there. Nothing is lost. That is the immutable law of Nature.You will not be able to detect the little improvement that has come out of a little practice as youhave not a subtle intellect, and as you have many kinds of impurities from beginningless time. You
must develop dispassion, patience and perseverance to a maximum degree ;you must have an
unshakable conviction in the existence of God and in the efficacy of spiritual practices. You musthave a strong determination :“I will realise God right now in this very birth, nay, in this very
second. I will realise or die.”
Some one hundred and fifty years ago there lived a very famous Yogi and Jnani by name
Sadasiva Brahmendra Saraswati. He lived in Nerur, near Karur, in the district of Tiruchirappalli, in
South India. He is the author of Brahma-Sutra Vritti, Atma-Vidya Vilasa and various other books.
He performed innumerable miracles.
Once, when he was absorbed in Samadhi on the banks of the Cauvery, he was carried away
by the flood and thrown somewhere else. He was buried deep in the sand. Labourers went to ploughthe fields and struck the head of the Yogi and some blood oozed out. To their great astonishment,they found a Yogi seated in Samadhi.
On another occasion, as a naked mendicant, he entered the Zenna of a Mohammedan chief.
The chief was quite enraged at the appearance of the sage in a nude state. In a fit of fury he cut offone of the arms of the Mahatma. Sadasiva Brahmendra walked away without uttering a word andwithout showing any sign of pain. The chief was greatly astonished at this strange condition of thesage. He realised that he must be a great Mahatma, a superhuman being. He repented greatly andfollowed the sage to apologise. Sadasiva never knew that his arm had been cut off. When the chiefnarrated to him what had happened in the camp, Sadasiva forgave him and simply touched hismaimed arm. He immediately had a new one.
It is the life of Sadasiva Brahman that made a very deep impression on my mind. I came to a
very definite conclusion that there was a sublime, divine life independent of objects and the play ofthe mind and senses. The sage was quite unconscious of the world. He was unconcerned when hisarm was cut off. He must have been absorbed in the Divine Consciousness and been one with theDivine.
Ordinary people yell even when there is a pin-prick in their body. When I heard about the
marvellous incident in the life of Sadasiva Brahmendra and read about it in the book, it gave me avery strong conviction in a Divine Existence and in a divine, eternal life where all sorrows melt, alldesires are satisfied and one gets supreme bliss, supreme peace and supreme knowledge.
13KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 4
SCRIPTURES ARE THE AUTHORITY
He who, having cast aside the ordinance of the scriptures, acts under the impulse of
desire, attains neither perfection nor happiness nor the supreme goal.
Therefore, let the scriptures be thy sole authority in determining what ought to be
done or what ought not to be done. Having known what is said in the ordinances of the
scriptures, thou shouldst act here.
(XVI-23 & 24)
Reason cannot be the authority in the matter of Dharma. Undeveloped persons cannot think
for themselves.
In the matter of Dharma, the scriptures are the only authority. You cannot know the truth
about Dharma through any source of knowledge other than the scriptures.
TheSruti and the Smriti are the two authoritative sources of Hinduism. Sruti literally means
“what is heard” and Smriti means “what is remembered”. Sruti is revelation. Smriti is tradition.
What is revealed is Sruti . The Upanishad is aSruti. What is remembered is Smriti. TheBhagavad
Gita is aSmriti.
Sruti is direct experience. Great Rishis heard the eternal truths of religion and left a record
of them for the benefit of posterity. These records constitute the Vedas. Hence the Sruti is the
primary authority. The Smriti is a recollection of that experience. Hence it is a secondary authority.
TheSmritis orDharma Shastras also are books written by sages, but they are not the final authority.
If there is anything in a Smriti which contradicts the Sruti, theSmriti is to be rejected. The
Bhagavad Gita also is a Smriti. So is the Mahabharata also.
TheSmritis or secondary scriptures are the ancient, sacred law-codes of the Hindus dealing
with the Sanatana Varnashrama Dharma. They supplement and explain the ritualistic injunctions
called Vidhis in the Vedas. TheSmriti orDharma Shastra is founded on the Sruti. TheSmritis are
based on the teachings of the Vedas. TheSmriti stands next in authority to the Sruti. It explains and
develops Dharma. It lays down the laws which regulate the national, social, family and individualobligations of the Hindus.
The words which are expressly called Smritis are the law books, the Dharma Shastras.
Smriti, in a broader sense, covers all Hindu Shastras save the Vedas.
The laws for regulating Hindu society are from time to time codified in the Smritis. The
Smritis have laid down definite rules and laws to guide the individuals and communities in their
daily conduct and to regulate their manners and customs. The
Smritis have given detailed
14SCRIPTURES ARE THE AUTHORITYThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book instructions, according to the conditions of the time, to all classes of men regarding their duties in
life.
From these Smritis the Hindu learns how to spend his whole life. The duties of Varnashrama
and all ceremonies are clearly given in these books. The Smritis prescribe certain acts and prohibit
some others for a Hindu, according to his birth and stage of life. The object of the Smritis is to purify
the heart of man and make him perfect and free.
These Smritis have varied from time to time. The injunctions and prohibitions of the Smritis
are related to particular social surroundings. As these surroundings and essential conditions of theHindu society changed from time to time, new Smritis had to be compiled by the sages of different
ages and different parts of India.
From time to time, a great law-giver would take his birth. He would codify the existing laws
and remove those which had become obsolete. He would make some alterations, adaptations,readjustments, additions and deletions, to suit the needs of the time and see that the way of living ofthe people would be in accordance with the teachings of the Vedas. Of such law-givers, Manu,
Yajnavalkya and Parasara were the most celebrated persons. Hindu society is founded upon andgoverned by the laws made by these three great sages. The Smritis are named after them. We have
theManu Smriti or the “Laws of Manu” or the “Institutes of Manu”; the Yajnavalkya Smriti and the
Parasara Smriti. Manu was the great law-giver of the race. He was the oldest law-giver as well. The
Yajnavalkya Smriti follows the same general lines as the Manu Smriti and is next in importance to
it.The Manu Smriti and the Yajnavalkya Smriti are universally accepted at the present time as
authoritative works all over India. The Yajnavalkya Smriti is chiefly consulted in all matters of
Hindu law. Even the Government of India is applying some of these laws.
There are eighteen main Smritis orDharma Shastras. The most important are those of
Manu, Yajnavalkya and Parasara. The other fifteen are those of Vishnu, Daksha, Apastamba,Samvarta, Vyasa, Harita, Satatapa, Vasishtha, Yama, Gautama, Devala, Sankha-Likhita, Usana,Atri and Saunaka.
The laws of Manu were intended for the Satya Yuga; those of Yajnavalkya were for the
Treta Yuga; those of Sankha-Likhita were for the Dwapara Yuga; and those of Parasara are for thepresent Kali Yuga.
The rules and laws which are based entirely upon our social position, time and clime, must
change with changes in society and the changing conditions of time and clime. Then only can theprogress of Hindu society be ensured.
It is not possible to follow some of the laws of Manu at the present time. We can follow their
spirit and not the letter. Society is advancing. When it advances, it outgrows certain laws whichwere valid and helpful at a particular stage of its growth. Many new conditions which were notthought out by the old law-givers have come into existence now. It is no use asking people to follownow those old laws which have become obsolete.
15KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Our present society has changed considerably. A new Smriti to suit the requirements of this
age is very necessary. Another sage must place before the Hindus of our days a new, suitable code
of laws. The time is ripe for a new Smriti. Cordial greetings to this sage.
I shall speak a word on conscience. Some people say, “We can find out good and evil, right
and wrong, by consulting our conscience only.” No individual will be able to do this by consultinghis conscience only. It may give some clue and help, but in difficult and trying conditions, it will nothelp one. Conscience is not an infallible guide. The conscience of a man changes according to theexperiences and education he has had. Conscience is one’s intellectual conviction only. Theconscience of the individual speaks in accordance with his own tendencies, proclivities,inclinations, education, habits and passions. The conscience of a savage speaks a language that isentirely different from that of a civilised European. The conscience of an African Negro speaks alanguage that is vastly different from that of an ethically developed Yogi of India. Ask a clerk at thecollectorate, “What are your duties?” He will say, “I must earn money and support my family andparents. I must not injure others. I must read the Ramayana.” He has not the least idea of the laws of
Nature. If you ask him, “What are your duties to the country and humanity? What are right andwrong? What are good and evil?” he will simply blink. Ask any vehicle driver, “What is yourduty?” He will say, “I must anyhow earn Rs. 20 daily. I have to purchase ten gallons of fuel, tyres,tubes and crude oil. The tyres are very costly. I have six daughters and five sons. I have to take careof them.” If you ask him anything about God, about moral virtues, liberation, bondage and freedom,about right and wrong, he will be bewildered. Why is there so much divergence between thepromptings of conscience of two persons of the same caste, religion and creed? Why do we find tendifferent convictions among ten persons of the same district and the same community? The voice ofconscience alone is not sufficient to guide man in understanding the law of God, about right andwrong, good and evil and other duties of life. The Shastras and realised persons only can truly guide
a man in the discharge of his duties in an efficient manner.
Dear friend, do your duties in a satisfactory manner. Consult the Shastras and the Mahatmas
whenever you are in doubt. As you have not the ability or the time to think of the moral principlesand rules given in the scriptures, you can get the moral precepts or instructions from the sages andsaints and follow them to the very letter. Evolve. Expand. Grow. Develop and realise theSatchidananda Atma.
5
BOND BETWEEN GURU & DISCIPLE
Know that by long prostration, by question and by service the wise, who have realised
the Truth, will instruct thee in that knowledge.
(IV-34)
The traditional concept of the Guru is a unique and wonderful gem in the cultural treasury of
India. It is our most precious possession. For, it is this concept that is to a large extent responsible
16SCRIPTURES ARE THE AUTHORITYThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book for the safe and unbroken perpetuation of some of the most precious aspects of our nation’s grand
spiritual heritage. It is the institution of Guru-Parampara (Guru-disciple lineage), that has, fromgeneration to generation and down the centuries, closely safeguarded and handed down the livingexperiences of the seers of the Upanishadic age. This sacred task it has performed in spite of many aviolent vicissitude in our nation’s history.
Spiritual knowledge is a matter of Guru-Parampara. It is handed down from the Guru to the
disciple. Study the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad. You will have a comprehensive understanding.
Gaudapadacharya imparted Self-knowledge to his disciple Govindacharya; Govindacharya to hisdisciple Sankara; and Sankara to Sureswaracharya. Matsyendranath imparted divine knowledge tohis disciple Gorakhnath, Gorakhnath to Nivrittinath, and Nivrittinath to Jnanadev. Totapuriimparted knowledge to Sri Ramakrishna, and Sri Ramakrishna to Swami Vivekananda. It was sageAshtavakra who moulded the life of Raja Janaka. It was Gorakhnath who shaped the spiritualdestiny of Raja Bhartrihari. It was Lord Krishna who made Arjuna and Uddhava get themselvesestablished on the spiritual path when their minds were in an unsettled state.
All the great ones had their teachers. Swetaketu learnt the nature of Brahman from sage
Uddalaka; Maitreyi from the great seer, Yajnavalkya; Bhrigu from Varuna; Narada Rishi fromSanatkumara; Nachiketas from Yama; Indra from Prajapathi. Several others humbly went to thewise ones, observed strict Brahmacharya, practised rigorous discipline and learnt Brahma-Vidyafrom them. All sophistry and ostentation, learning and conceit, have to be cast aside before thedisciple approaches the Guru. The whole personality of the pupil should be effaced if the wisdom ofthe teacher is to illumine the self of the pupil.
“To that great one who has supreme devotion to God and as much devotion to the Guru as to
God, do the truths become illumined”, says the Svetasvatara Upanishad.
There is a good deal of heated debate and controversy amongst people on the matter of the
necessity of a Guru. Some assert with vehemence and force that a preceptor is not at all necessaryfor attaining Self-realisation and spiritual advancement, and that one can have spiritual progressand Self-illumination through one’s own efforts only. They quote various passages from thescriptures and assign arguments and reasonings to support them. Others boldly assert with greateremphasis and force that no spiritual progress is possible for a man, however intelligent he may beand however hard he may attempt and struggle on the spiritual path, unless he gets the benign Graceand direct guidance of a spiritual preceptor to whom he submits himself.
Now, open your eyes and note carefully what is going on in this world in all walks of life.
Even a cook needs a teacher. He serves under a senior cook for some years. He obeys himimplicitly. He pleases his teacher in all possible manner. He learns all the techniques of cooking. Hegets knowledge through the grace of the senior cook, his teacher. A junior lawyer wants the helpand guidance of a senior advocate. Students of mathematics and medicine need the help andguidance of a professor. A student of science, music or astronomy wants the guidance of a scientist,a musician or an astronomer. When such is the case with ordinary secular knowledge, what to speakof the inner spiritual path wherein the student has to walk alone with closed eyes!
17KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book When you are in a thick jungle you come across several cross footpaths. You are in a
dilemma. You do not know the directions and the path by which you should go. You are
bewildered. You want a guide here to direct you along the right path.
It is universally admitted that an efficient teacher is needed in all branches of knowledge on
this physical plane, and that physical, mental and moral culture and growth can be had only throughthe help and guidance of a capable master. This is a universal and inexorable law of Nature. Why doyou deny then, friend, the application of this universally accepted law in the realm of spiritualityalone?
The spiritual path is thorny, rugged and precipitous. It is enveloped in darkness. The
guidance of a Guru who has already trodden the path is imperatively necessary. He will be able tothrow light on the path and remove obstacles.
The spiritual path is not like writing a thesis for the M.A. examination. The help of a teacher
is necessary at every moment. Young aspirants become self-sufficient, arrogant and self-assertivein these days. They do not care to carry out the instructions of a Guru. They do not wish to have aGuru. They want independence from the very beginning. They mistake licentiousness or “havingtheir own ways and sweet will” for freedom. This is a serious, lamentable mistake. This is thereason why they do not grow. They lose faith in the efficacy of Sadhana and in the existence of God.They wander about in a happy-go-lucky manner without any aim, from Kashmir to Gangotri, andthen from Gangotri to Rameswaram, talking some nonsense on the way, something from Vichar
Sagar, something from the Panchadasi, and pose as Jivanmuktas.
Some do meditation for some years independently. Later on they feel acutely the necessity
of a Guru because they come across some obstacles on the way. They do not know how to proceedfurther and how to overcome these impediments or stumbling blocks. Then they begin to search fora master.
A stranger in a big city finds it difficult to return to his residence in a small avenue though he
has walked along the way half a dozen times. When difficulty arises even in the case of finding outthe way through streets and roads, how much more difficult it should be on the path of spiritualitywhere one walks alone with closed eyes!
The Guru must not only have a knowledge of the Vedas andUpanishads but must be
established in Brahman also. Mere study of books cannot make one a Guru. Only he who hasstudied the Vedas and has direct knowledge of the Atman through inner personal experience can be
considered a Guru. If you find peace in the presence of a Mahatma and if your doubts are removedby his very presence, you can take him as your Guru.
A Guru is one who has full Self-illumination and who removes the veil of ignorance in
deluded Jivas. Guru, Truth, Brahman, Iswar, Atman, God and Om are all synonymous terms. Thenumber of realised souls may be less in this Kali Yuga when compared to the Satya Yuga, but theyare always present to help aspirants. They are always searching for qualified aspirants.
18BOND BETWEEN GURU & DISCIPLEThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book In olden days the aspirants were required to live with the Guru for a number of years so that
the latter could study the students thoroughly. The food during spiritual practice, what to practise
and how, whether the students are qualified for the path of Yoga, the temperament of the aspirantsas well as other items have to be considered and judged by the Guru. It is the Guru who shoulddecide whether the aspirants are fit for advanced practices, practices of a middling type orelementary practices. He will then prescribe different kinds of exercises for each type. Sadhanadiffers according to the nature, capacity and qualification of the aspirant. After understanding thetheory of Yoga, one has to learn the practice from an experienced Yogi Guru. As long as there is thisworld, there will be books on Yoga and teachers also. You will have to search for them with faith,devotion and earnestness. You can get easy lessons from the Guru and practise them at home also inthe initial stages. When you have advanced a little you will have to stay with the Guru to learn andmaster the difficult exercises. The personal contact with the Guru has manifold advantages. Youwill be greatly benefited by the magnetic aura of your Guru.
For the practice of Bhakti Yoga and Vedanta you do not require a Guru at your side. After
learning the Srutis for some time from a Guru, you have to reflect and meditate alone in entire
seclusion, whereas in Kundalini Yoga you have to break up the Granthis and take the Kundalinifrom Chakra to Chakra. These are all difficult processes. The method of uniting the Apana and thePrana and sending it along the Sushumna and breaking the Granthis needs the help of a Guru. Youhave to sit at the Guru’s feet for a long time. You have to understand clearly the location of theNadis and Chakras and the techniques of the Yogic Kriyas.
Lay before your Guru the secrets of your heart. The more you do so, the greater will be the
sympathy and help you will get from him. This sympathy means an accession of strength to you inthe struggle against sin and temptation.
The Guru often tests the students in various ways. Some students misunderstand him and
lose their faith. Hence they are not benefited. Those who stand the tests boldly come out successfulin the end. The periodical examinations in the spiritual university of sages are very stiff indeed. Indays of yore the tests were very severe.
Once Gorakhnath asked some of his students to climb up a tall tree and hurl themselves,
head downwards, on a very sharp trident. Many faithless students kept quiet, but one devotedstudent at once climbed up the tree with lightning speed and threw himself down. He was protectedby the invisible hand of Gorakhnath. He had immediate Self-realisation. This student had noattachment to his body. The other faithless students had very strong infatuation and ignorance.
Guru Govind Singh tested his students also. He said to them, “My dear disciples, if you have
real devotion to me, let six of you come forward and give me your heads. Then we can have successin our attempt in the war.” Two faithful disciples only offered their heads. Guru Govind Singh tookthem into the camp and cut off the heads of two goats instead.
Sankara once wanted to test the devotion of his disciple, Padmapada. The river Cauvery was
in full flood. Sankara stood on one bank of the river and Padmapada on the other. Sankara thenbeckoned to Padmapada to come to him at once. There was no boat at the moment. Padmapada, notcaring for his life, at once jumped into the river although he did not know how to swim. By the
19KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Grace of Sankara, at each step in the water, a lotus flower appeared to support the foot of
Padmapada. Hence his name, Padmapada. “Padma” means lotus; “Pada” means feet.
Some, like Yogi Milarepa, had to serve their masters arduously for a long time, whereas
others got initiation in a flash. It depends upon the spiritual Sadhana and evolution of the aspirant.Yogi Milarepa underwent a series of struggles during his service of his Guru. He had to performsuperhuman acts of heroism and bravery before he was initiated. Sages and Rishis of yore put theirstudents through severe trials before they took them into their confidence. They knew intuitivelywhether a student was fit for initiation or not. The neophytes were entrusted with the task of tendingthe cattle, bringing fuel from the forest, washing the clothes of the Guru, and such other workswhich appear menial in the eyes of the present-day aspirants. To aspirants like Svetaketu, Indra,Satyakama and others, every act was an act of Yoga or worship of the Guru. To them nothing wasmenial. They dedicated everything to their master with unselfish motive. Therefore, they attainedpurification of the heart quickly. They studied and mastered the Vedas and finally acquired the
knowledge of the Supreme Self.
Gautama chose four hundred lean and weak cows and requested Satyakama Jabala, his
disciple, to tend them. He instructed Satyakama not to return before the number had become athousand. Satyakama lived in the forest for a long time. A few days prior to his departure to hispreceptor’s hermitage, the gods Vayu, Agni and Surya instructed him in the knowledge ofBrahman. Gautama was astonished to see Satyakama shining with Brahmic splendour in his face.
Ashtavakra initiated King Janaka in the twinkling of an eye. The Devas initiated Khatvanga
in a Muhurta. Some initiate their students through simple gazing. Sri Sankara inspired Totakathrough his mere thought-power. Therefore, it depends upon the ability, capacity and purity of theaspirant to receive the Divine Grace which will elevate him to exalted heights of supreme joy andbliss.
The aspirant should be ever watchful to receive spiritual instruction from whatever source it
may come. Anyone who helps him in removing his ignorance is a guide. But he who hastens theaspirant’s spiritual progress and takes a lively and keen interest in his evolution, is the real Sadguru.
Just note how Dattatreya attained knowledge of the Self from even insentient beings. The
aspirant, before he desires the Grace of the master, should deserve it. The supply of Divine Gracecomes only when there is a real thirst in the aspirant and only when he is fit to receive it.
The Guru will find out, through a close study of the aspirant, the latter’s tastes, temperament
and capacity, and decide for him the most suitable path. If the aspirant’s heart is impure, the teacherwill prescribe selfless service for a number of years. Then the Guru will find out for what particularpath the student is fit and initiate him in that path.
A Bhakta will be initiated by a Bhakta saint in the path of devotion. A Jnani will initiate a
student of Vedanta in the Mahavakyas. A Hatha Yogi or a Raja Yogi can initiate another in thatparticular path. But a sage of perfect realisation, a full-blown Jnani or a perfected Yogi, can giveinitiation in any particular path. A sage like Sri Sankara or Madhusudhan Saraswati can initiate anaspirant in any particular path for which the latter is fit.
20BOND BETWEEN GURU & DISCIPLEThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book If a Bhakta saint is approached by an aspirant who wants to follow the path of knowledge,
the former may direct the latter to a proper Guru for initiation, because the Bhakta saint might not
have had the Vedantic realisation of oneness. But a Jnani can initiate an aspirant in the path ofBhakti also, because he has already realised the fruit of Saguna worship in the present or in aprevious birth.
It is very difficult to know the particular Yoga by which the Guru has reached perfection,
unless he himself reveals it to the aspirant out of compassion. No aspirant will be bold enough to putthis question to his Guru lest he should be considered impertinent. Except in the case of advancedaspirants, initiation comes after long and patient service of the preceptor. Both the Guru and thedisciple should be well acquainted with the nature of each other. The student should be able to knowthoroughly the ideals and principles of his Guru, and the Guru must be able to detect the mistakesand imperfections in the student. The Guru should be allowed to make a complete study of theaspirant’s inner nature. The student should lay bare before his preceptor all his weaknesses andshortcomings. He should allow himself to be tested by his Guru in the crucible of suffering in avariety of ways so that his Guru may have full confidence in him.
The disciple also should come into closer contact with the Guru during his service and try to
imbibe all his Guru’s good qualities. The disciple should never try to find fault with the Guru inthought, word or deed. If the fault-finding nature is strong in the disciple, he cannot imbibeanything from the preceptor and his spiritual progress will be at a standstill. Firstly, the studentmust admit his weaknesses before the Guru. He must place before the Guru all his difficulties andthen alone will the teacher be able to remove the pitfalls and snares through efficient and potentmeans.
The student and the teacher should live together as a father and devoted son or as a husband
and wife, with extreme sincerity and devotion. The aspirant should have an eager, receptive attitudeto imbibe the teachings of the master. Then only will he be spiritually benefited. Otherwise, there isnot the least hope of a spiritual life for the aspirant, nor is there any chance of a completeregeneration of his old diabolic nature.
It is a great pity that the present system of education in India is not favourable for the
spiritual growth of aspirants. The minds of the students are saturated with materialistic poison.Aspirants of the present day have not any idea of the true relationship between the Guru anddisciple. It is not like the relationship between a student and a teacher or a professor in schools andcolleges. Spiritual relationship is entirely different. It involves dedication. It is very sacred. It ispurely divine.
O seekers of Truth! it is imperative that you should recognise the deep implications of a life
dedicated to the cause of Truth, to the cause of God realisation, and seek the protection of the Guruif you are to have real success in spiritual Sadhana. Abandon prejudices, wrong notions ofself-sufficiency and pride of intellect. Purify your heart. Be simple and straightforward. Have agenuine aspiration for freedom from mortal life. Correct discriminative understanding, completedispassion for things mundane, self-restraint, tranquillity of mind, and a strong yearning forliberation are the prerequisites for studying under a spiritual preceptor. With these qualifications,
21KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book he who reverentially seeks the guidance of the preceptor shall be blessed with the saving
knowledge.
Give up the delusive notion that to submit oneself to the preceptor, to obey and to carry out
his instructions, is slavish mentality. The ignorant man thinks that it is beneath his dignity andagainst his freedom to submit to the command of another. This is a grave blunder. If you reflectcarefully, you will see that your individual freedom is in reality absolute slavery to your own egoand vanity. It is nothing but the vagaries of the sensual mind. He who attains victory over the mindand the ego is the truly free man. He is a hero. It is for attaining this victory that a man submits to thehigher spiritualised personality of a Guru. Through this submission he vanquishes his lower egoand realises the bliss of the infinite Consciousness.
Have an iron determination to realise the Supreme Divine Being. Know Him through the
Grace of your Guru. Start your efforts in the right direction. Yes, do it now!
6
THE CASTE SYSTEM
The fourfold caste has been created by Me according to the differentiation of Guna
and Karma; though I am the author thereof, know Me as non-doer and immutable.
(IV-13)
Of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas, as also Sudras, O Parantapa! the duties are
distributed according to the qualities born of their own nature.
(XVIII-41)
The four castes are the Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Sudra. This division is according
to the Guna and Karma. Guna is quality. Karma is the kind of work. Guna and Karma determine thecaste of a man.
There are three qualities or Gunas—Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas. Sattwa is purity. Rajas is
passion. Tamas is inertia. These three qualities are found in man in varying proportions. Sattwapreponderates in some persons. They are the Brahmanas. They are the wise persons or thinkers.They are the priests, ministers or philosophers who guide kings or rulers. In some others, Rajas ispredominant. They are the Kshatriyas. They are warriors or men of action. They fight enemies orinvaders and defend the country. Then in the third group the quality of Tamas is predominant. Theyare the Vaishyas or traders. They do business and engage in agriculture and amass wealth. Sudrasare the servants. None of the three qualities is highly developed in them. They serve the other threecastes.
22BOND BETWEEN GURU & DISCIPLEThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book In a broad sense, a Sattwic man who is pious and virtuous and leads the divine life, is a
Brahmin; a Rajasic man with heroic qualities is a Kshatriya; a Rajasic man with business tendencies
is a Vaishya; and a Tamasic man is a Sudra.
Serenity, self-restraint, austerity, purity, forgiveness, and also uprightness, knowledge,
realisation and belief in God, are the duties of the Brahmanas, born of their own nature.
Prowess, splendour, firmness, dexterity, not fleeing from battle, generosity and lordliness
are the duties of the Kshatriyas, born of their own nature.
Agriculture, cattle-rearing and trade are the duties of the Vaishyas, born of their own nature.
And action consisting of service is the duty of the Sudras, born of their own nature.The underlying principle in the caste system or Varna Dharma is division of labour. Rishis
studied human nature carefully. They came to the conclusion that all men were not equally fit for all
types of work. Hence they deemed it necessary to allocate different kinds of duties to differentclasses of people, according to their aptitude, capacity or quality. The Brahmanas were in charge ofspiritual and intellectual affairs. The work of political administration and defence was given to theKshatriyas. The Vaishyas were entrusted with the duty of supplying food for the nation andadministering its economic welfare. The Sudras did the menial work. The Rishis felt all these needsof the Hindu nation and started the system of castes.
This division of labour began in Vedic times. In the Purusha Sukta of the Rig Veda there is a
reference to the division of Hindu society into four classes. It is described there that the Brahmanascame out of the face of the Lord, the Creator, the Kshatriyas from His arms, the Vaishyas from Histhighs, and the Sudras from His feet. The Vedas have taught that the Brahmana was the brain of
society, the Kshatriya its arms, the Vaishya its stomach and the Sudra its feet.
There is no question of higher and lower here. There was once a quarrel among the senses,
the mind and the Prana as to who was superior. There was a quarrel amongst the different organsand the stomach also. If the hands quarrel with the stomach, the entire body will suffer. If Pranadeparts from the body, all the organs will suffer. The head or the stomach cannot claim superiorityover the feet and the hands. The hands and feet are as important as the stomach or the head.
If there is a quarrel amongst the different castes as to who is superior, then the entire social
fabric will suffer. There will be disharmony, rupture and discord. A scavenger or a barber is asimportant as the Dewan or minister for the running of society. The social edifice is built on the lawof spiritual economics. It has nothing to do with superiority or inferiority. Each class contributes itsbest to the commonweal or world-solidarity.
A Brahmin is no Brahmin if he is not endowed with purity and good character, if he leads a
life of dissipation and immorality. A Sudra is a Brahmin if he leads a virtuous and pious life. What agreat soul Vidura was! What a noble, candid, straightforward student Satyakama Jabala of theChhandogya Upanishad was! Caste is a question of one’s character. Varna is no more the colour of
the skin but the colour of one’s character or quality. Conduct and character count and not lineage
23KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book alone. If one is a Brahmin by birth and at the same time if he possesses the virtues of a Brahmin, it is
extremely good, because certain virtuous qualifications only determine the birth of a Brahmin.
The Hindus have survived many a foreign conquest on account of their caste system, but
they have developed jealousy and hatred in the name of the caste system. They have not got thespirit of co-operation. That is why they are weak and disunited today. They have become sectariansin the name of the caste system. Hence the degradation in India.
The caste system is indeed a splendid thing. It is quite flawless, but the defect came in from
somewhere else. The upper classes gradually neglected their duties. The test of ability andcharacter slowly disappeared. Birth became the chief consideration in determining caste. All thecastes fell from their ideals and forgot all about their duties. The Brahmins became selfish andclaimed superiority over others by mere birth, without possessing the necessary qualities. TheKshatriyas lost their chivalry and spirit of sacrifice. The Vaishyas became avaricious and greedy.They did not earn their wealth by honest means. They did not look after the economic welfare of thepeople. They did not do charity. They also lost the spirit of sacrifice. The Sudras gave up service.They became officers. They wished that others should serve them. The greed and pride of mancreated discord and disharmony.
There is nothing wrong in the caste system. It is arrogance and haughtiness in man that has
brought trouble. Man or the little Jiva is imperfect. He is full of defects. He is simply waiting toclaim superiority over others. The Brahmin thinks that the other three castes are inferior to him. TheKshatriya thinks that the Vaishya or Sudra is inferior to him. A rich Sudra thinks that he is superiorto a poor Brahmin or a poor Kshatriya or Vaishya.
In the West and in the rest of the world also there still exists the caste system, though it is not
so rigidly observed. Some of the Western philosophers have made a division of three classes,namely, philosophers, warriors and the masses. The philosophers correspond to the Brahmins, thewarriors to the Kshatriyas, and the masses to the Vaishyas and Sudras. This system is indispensableto keep society in a state of perfect harmony and order.
Throughout the world this classification of caste exists. The priests and the clergymen
represent the Brahmins. They practise meditation and engage in religious preaching. The soldiers inthe West are the Kshatriyas of Rajputana. The business people are the Vaishyas. Those who domenial service are the Sudras. This classification is according to the Gunas and Karma.
At the present moment the caste system is in name only. It has to be rebuilt properly. The
Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Sudras, who have fallen from their ideals, who are not doingtheir respective duties, must do so properly now. They must be educated on the right lines. Theymust raise themselves to their original lofty level. The sectarian spirit must die. They shoulddevelop a new, understanding heart of love and devotion, with a spirit of co-operation, sacrifice andservice.
24THE CASTE SYSTEMThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 7
THE GLORY OF SWADHARMA
Better is one’s own duty, though devoid of merit, than the duty of another well
discharged. Better is death in one’s own duty; the duty of another is fraught with fear.
(III-35)
Better is one’s own duty, though destitute of merits, than the duty of another
well-performed. He who does the duty ordained by his own nature incurs no sin.
(XVIII-47)
Just as the doctor prescribes different medicines for different people according to their
constitutions and the nature of their diseases, so also Hinduism prescribes different duties for
different people. The rules for women are different from the rules for men. The rules for differentcastes vary. But non-violence, truth, non-stealing, cleanliness and control of the senses are dutiescommon to all men.
Dharma depends upon time, circumstance, age, degree of evolution and the community to
which one belongs. The Dharma of this century is different from that of the tenth century.
Man has certain important duties and responsibilities in life. He has to evolve morally and
spiritually by performing these duties in the right manner. He has to act and live in accordance tothe law of God. He has to find out the rules of conduct and the measure of his responsibilities. Hemust have a thorough knowledge of the moral code of Manu and Yajnavalkya and act according tothe rules laid down therein. Then only can he be rightly called a man.
Man has duties towards his parents, children and other family members. He has duties
towards society and the country. He has duties of the Varnashrama. He has duties towards his ownself and, last but not the least, he has important duties towards God. He must fulfil all these duties ofhis life. Then only can he make progress in life.
He must serve his parents who have given him this physical body. He must serve them with
great faith and feeling. In the Taittiriya Upanishad you will find: “Matri devo bhava; pitri devo
bhava—The parents should be worshipped as visible representatives of God”.
Sri Ashutosh Mukerjee, the late Vice-Chancellor of the Calcutta University, used to
worship his mother daily and drink the water used to wash her feet before going to his office.Modern educated persons do not pay proper regard to their parents. If the father is uneducated and ifthe son is an England-returned man, he will say that his father is a servant of the house whensomeone puts him the question, “Who is this old man?”
25KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Man must train his children in the proper manner. He must give them proper education in
Sanskrit, English and technical subjects. He must train them on the path of spirituality from their
early age. He must be devoted to his wife, who is his partner in life. No religious rite is valid withouther presence. He must regard his wife as a real helper on the path of spirituality. As soon as a son isborn, she becomes his mother.
TheSrutis declare: “Atma vai jaayate putrah—The soul is born as a son”. Man must give up
all ideas of husband-wife relationship as soon as a son is born. He must give up sexual intercourse.Both should lead a spiritual life. The husband should not regard his wife as a machine forprocreation only. There is some higher spiritual purpose. She must help her husband in his spiritualevolution. She must attend to his wants and comforts always. She must serve him properly in allways.
Man must serve society according to his temperament, taste and capacity. Such service will
help in the purification of his mind. He must serve with Nishkama Bhav as an honorary member. Heshould not get any remuneration. He must develop the spirit of patriotism. He must serve thecountry. Service of the country is service of Mother Kali. It is pure Mother-worship.
Man must perform the duties of his Varnashrama. A Brahmin should observe serenity,
self-restraint, austerity, purity, forgiveness and uprightness, and manifest wisdom, knowledge andbelief in God. A Kshatriya should manifest prowess, splendour, firmness, dexterity, generosity andbravery, these qualities being the nature of a ruler. The Vaishya should engage in agriculture, tradeand protection of cattle. The Sudra should serve the other three castes.
A Brahmachari should study religious books till he reaches the age of twenty-five. If he has
taken the vow of celibacy till the end of life, if he wants to become a lifelong celibate, he need notenter the stage of a householder. He should have real, lasting dispassion and discrimination. Thenonly will he be really benefited. He can devote his whole life to spiritual pursuits.
If a Brahmachari does not want to take up the course of lifelong celibacy, he can become a
householder. He can marry after finishing his education. He can visit his wife occasionally forbringing progeny to keep up the line and not for sensual gratification only. He will be still styled asa Brahmachari if he strictly adheres to all the rules as enumerated above.
After having completed the stage of a householder and after fixing up his son in a proper
position, he can become a Vanaprastha, either alone or with his wife. He should not remain in thehouse till the end of life. He will have various anxieties and attachment for his children if he remainsin the house. If he finds it difficult to leave the house, he can remain in a cottage nearby. If he findsthis also difficult, he can remain in a solitary room in his house and have interviews with visitorsand members in the evening between 4p.m. and 5p.m.
If a Vanaprastha wants to take Sannyasa he can do so. Vanaprastha is only a preparatory
stage for Sannyasa. The glory and freedom of a Sannyasin can hardly be described. A Sannyasinonly can cut off all sorts of attachment. In the absence of Sannyasa, some sort of subtle connectionswill always remain. When one once takes Sannyasa, one becomes dead to the family members.Otherwise they will always think of getting something from the person. The subtle attachment in
26THE GLORY OF SWADHARMAThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book the mind still remains in both parties. This is quite sufficient to bring one back to the wheel of births
and deaths. The very colour, the very orange robe gives strength and purity. I do not believe thosewho say that they have given colouring to their hearts. This is timidity and hypocrisy. There are stillinfatuation, attraction and desires lurking in them. If there is real internal change, the externalchange is bound to come. I do admit that the eradication of egoism, thoughts and desires does reallyconstitute real Sannyasa, but the Ashrama-Bheda is absolutely necessary. Why then did Sri Sankaraand Sri Ramakrishna take to Sannyasa? What is the necessity for this order at all? Sannyasa has itsown advantages.
At the present moment the Ashramas cannot be lived exactly according to the details of the
ancient rules, as the conditions have changed very much; but the Ashramas may be revived in theirspirit for the improvement of modern life. In these stages no one should do the duty of another. Thestudent or Brahmachari should not do the duties of a householder, a recluse or a Sannyasin. Thehouseholder should not perform the duties of a Brahmachari, a Vanaprastha or a Sannyasin. ASannyasin should not seek again the joys of a householder.
Peace and order will prevail in society only if and when all people do their respective duties
efficiently. The abolition of castes and Ashramas will cut at the very root of social duties. How canthe nation hope to live when the Varnashrama Dharma is not rigidly practised?
An ignorant worldly-minded man says, “I have to do my duties. I have to educate my four
sons and three daughters. I have to please my employer. I have heavy duties in the office. I have toremit money to my widowed sister. I have a large family. I have six brothers and five sisters. Whereis the time for performing Sandhya and Japa and study of religious books? There is no time even tobreathe. I have no leisure. Even during holidays I have to work. I bring office papers to my houseand work at night till eleven o’clock. I do not want Sannyasa or any Yoga. The office work and themaintenance of my family is itself Yoga.”
Do you really call this duty? It is mere slavery. It is bondage. The man is afraid of his
superior at every moment. Even in his dreams he meets his office mates and superior and postsfigures in the ledger. This is not sense of duty. This man cannot pray even for a second. He has notime to read a single verse of the Gita. There is not a single thought of God even in a month. He
takes tea, has his food, sits at the table for writing, sleeps and procreates. Thus his whole life passesaway like this. This is selfish work. This is not duty. This is work done for gain and satisfaction ofthe lower appetites. Anything done under compulsion and expectation is not duty. You must notinterpret slavery as duty. You must not take selfish works that are done through attachment, greedand passion as duty. You will be doing a great injustice. This is self-created drudgery.
An officer or clerk earns money by taking bribes, and when his conscience pricks, he feeds
some Brahmins and says, “I have done my duty today. I have fed fifteen Brahmins and have giveneach twenty-five paise.” This is his idea of duty. He adds, “Why should I take Sannyasa and practiseYoga? I will earn tons of money and do charity. This is the best kind of life.” Poor deluded soul!May God give him good understanding!
“Ahimsa paramo dharmah—Non-injury is the highest virtue”. This injunction cannot be
strictly practised by householders, it can be practised by Sannyasins who tread the path of
27KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book renunciation. Only they will have to practise it. If a vagabond enters the house and tries to molest a
lady, a householder cannot keep quiet. He cannot say, “I will not resist evil now.” He will have totake a stick immediately and give the intruder a good thrashing.
Suppose a lady is in danger and somebody wants to murder her to take away her jewels. She
seeks the shelter of a young, strong man for protection. It is the duty of this young man to resist eviland defend her by attacking the cruel man. He cannot say, “Ahimsa paramo dharmah” now. It is hisduty to protect the lady, otherwise he fails in his duty.
Morality and duty vary according to circumstances. To resist evil becomes the duty of a
man in certain circumstances. A king should always raise his rod of chastisement to keep peace andorder in his country. He cannot say, “I will not resist evil—Ahimsa paramo dharmah.” He will failin the discharge of his duty if he does not punish the wicked. His country will be in a state of utterchaos. To hang a murderer or a dacoit is Ahimsa for a king. Himsa and Ahimsa are relative terms.
To kill a man who is taking away the lives of many is Ahimsa. To shoot a tiger, a man-eater,
is Ahimsa. Have you understood the secret of Ahimsa now? A real Sannyasin should not defendhimself even when his life is in danger. A Sannyasin is one who has no body and who identifieshimself with Brahman or Atman.
To shoot a dog or a horse that is suffering from acute agony that cannot be alleviated, is
Ahimsa to a European. He wants to free the dog from suffering. His motive is good.
I wish to point out to you again that morality and duty are relative terms. They change
according to state of life, stage of mental growth and evolution, time and circumstance, and thecountry in which one lives. To eat meat in Kashmir is perfectly moral for a Kashmiri pundit. To eatfish is perfectly moral for a Mohammedan or a Chinaman, but to a Hindu this is highly immoral. Agentleman or a lady can very easily have a divorce in the West. Marriage is a contract in the West,whereas in India it is a sacrament or holy act that is done before the sacred fire. Divorce is quitemoral in the West, but it is highly immoral in the East. To an Arya Samajist, widow-marriage isquite moral; to a Sanatanist it is highly immoral. Polyandry is quite moral in Tibet, but it is highlyimmoral in the eyes of other people of other countries. It is perfectly moral for a Sikh to drink, but itis immoral for him to smoke. People of cold countries require meat and a little liquor to keep up heatand help digestion. A soldier needs meat to keep up his strength and martial spirit. A Brahmin or aSannyasin wants vegetable food, milk and fruit to help his meditation and keep up his Sattwicmental attitude. Rishi Visvamitra had to eat prohibited meat when his life was in jeopardy. Moralitychanges when one’s life is at stake. Ignorant people hate others when they see them doingsomething which they themselves are not doing. A Madrasi vegetarian Brahmin hates a flesh-eatingBengali Brahmin. This is a sad mistake. This is highly lamentable. This retards one’s spiritualgrowth. A Madrasi is horrified when he sees a Hindustani eating with both hands from the sameplate as his children.
Similarly, the idea of duty also varies among people of different countries. An African
Negro cannot do Agnihotra in his hot country in summer. A Kashmiri pundit cannot take a morningbath in winter in Kashmir. The duty of one class of people cannot be the duty of another class ofpeople. The duty of a man of one state of life cannot be the duty of a man of another state of life. The
28THE GLORY OF SWADHARMAThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book duties of a Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Sudra are very much different. The duties of a
Brahmachari, a householder, a forest-dweller and Sannyasin are quite different. A householdercannot perform the duties of a Sannyasin. A Brahmin cannot do the duty of a soldier. To kill anenemy in the battlefield is the duty of a Kshatriya. To practise Ahimsa in thought, word and deed isthe duty of a Sannyasin and also of a Brahmin. Man evolves quickly by performing rigidly theduties allotted to his station of life.
Nectar’s sons! Children of immortality! Shake off all weaknesses. Stand up. Gird up the
loins. Perform your Swadharma satisfactorily in accordance with your caste or stage of life. Evolvequickly in spirituality. Eternal bliss, supreme peace and infinite knowledge can be had only in God.Practice of Swadharma will surely lead to the attainment of God-consciousness. There is nohappiness in finite objects. In the Infinite alone is bliss. Understand the truth through the practice ofSwadharma. This world is unreal. It is like a mirage. The senses and mind deceive you at everymoment. Wake up. Open your eyes. Learn to discriminate. Do not trust your senses. They are yourenemies. It is very difficult to get a human birth. Life is short. Time is fleeting. Those who cling tothe unreal things of the world are verily committing suicide. Struggle hard to practise yourSwadharma. Keep the ideal before your eyes always. Have a programme of life. Attempt to realisethe ideal. Stick to Swadharma with leech-like tenacity. Practise it and realise the Satchidanandastate right now in this very second.
May the blessings of the Lord be upon you all! May joy, bliss, immortality, peace and poise
abide with you for ever! Glory, glory to Swadharma!
8
ALL ROADS LEAD TO ROME
In whatever way men approach Me, even so do I reward them; My path do men tread
in all ways, O son of Pritha
(IV-11)
You may reach the same goal by different paths. Just as you can reach Mount Kailas by
different paths, such as via Badrinath or Almora or Gangotri or Ladakh, so also you can reach thegoal of life by different paths—Karma Yoga, Bhakti Yoga, Raja Yoga or Jnana Yoga.
Karma Yoga is the path of works. Bhakti Yoga is the path of love. Raja Yoga is the path of
psychic control. Jnana Yoga is the path of self-analysis and knowledge. Just as you can reachCalcutta by train, car, aeroplane or steamer, so also you can reach the goal of life or your spiritualdestination by any one of these four paths.
The four divisions are not hard and fast. There are no marked demarcation lines among the
four paths. They are not cut and dried. They are not very rigid and marked. These paths are made inaccordance to the temperament or tendency that is predominant in the individual. One path does not
29KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book exclude the other paths. The path of action is suitable for a man of Karmic tendency. The path of
love is adapted for a man of emotional temperament. The path of Raja Yoga is suited for a man ofmystic temperament. The path of Vedanta or Jnana Yoga is suitable for a man of will and reason.Each path blends into the other. Ultimately, all these paths converge and become one. It is verydifficult to say where Raja Yoga ends and Jnana Yoga begins. All the aspirants of the differentpaths meet on a common platform or junction in the long run.
Religion must educate and develop the whole man—his head, heart and hand. Then only
will there be perfection. A one-sided development is not commendable. The four paths, far frombeing antagonistic to one another, indicate that the different methods of the Yoga system are inabsolute harmony with one another. Karma Yoga leads to Bhakti Yoga, which in its turn leads toRaja Yoga. Raja Yoga brings Jnana. Karma Yoga removes the tossing of the mind, Raja Yogasteadies the mind, and Jnana Yoga removes the veil of ignorance and brings in knowledge of theSelf. Every Yoga is a fulfilment of the preceding one. Thus, Bhakti is the fulfilment of Karma, RajaYoga of Bhakti Yoga, and Jnana of all the preceding three.
Supreme devotion is Jnana only. Bhakti, it should be borne in mind, is not divorced from
Jnana. On the contrary, Jnana intensifies Bhakti. Sri Sankara, the great Adwaita Jnani, was a greatBhakta of Lord Hari, Hara and Devi. Jnanadev of Alandi, the eminent Yogi of Maharashtra, was aBhakta of Lord Krishna. Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa worshipped Kali and got Jnana throughSwami Totapuri, his Adwaita Guru. Appayya Dikshitar, a famous Jnani of South India and theauthor of Siddhanta Lesha and other monumental works on Vedanta, was a devotee of Lord Shiva.
The practice of Karma Yoga prepares the aspirant for the reception of knowledge of the
Self. It moulds him into a proper Adhikari or qualified aspirant for the study of Vedanta. Ignorantpeople jump at once to Jnana Yoga without having any preliminary training in Karma Yoga. That isthe reason why they fail miserably in realising the Truth. The impurities still lurk in their minds.The mind is filled with likes and dislikes. They only talk of Brahman or God. They indulge in allkinds of useless discussions, vain debates and dry, endless controversies. Their philosophy is ontheir lips only. in other words, they are lip-Vedantins. What is really wanted is practical Vedantathrough ceaseless selfless service.
Those who follow the path of Karma Yoga should do work for the sake of work only,
without any motive. Two things are indispensably requisite in the practice of Karma Yoga. AKarma Yogi should have extreme non-attachment to the fruit of his works; and secondly, he shoulddedicate all his actions at the altar of God with the feeling of self-surrender. Non-attachment bringsfreedom and immortality. Attachment is real death. Non-attachment is eternal life. Non-attachmentmakes a man absolutely fearless. When you thus consecrate all your actions to the Lord, you willnaturally develop devotion to Him, and the greater the devotion the nearer you will be to the Lord.You will slowly begin to feel that God works directly through your body and senses. You will feelno strain in the discharge of your works now. The heavy load you felt previously on account of yourfalse egoism will have now vanished out of sight, never to return.
Bhakti Yoga is the path of devotion or the path of affection. It is suitable for people of
devotional temperament or in whom the love element predominates. Ladies are fit for this path,because affection predominates in them. Generally, there is an admixture of the devotional and
30ALL ROADS LEAD TO ROMEThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book intellectual temperaments in all persons. Hence, Bhakti Yoga is suitable for the vast majority of
persons. In Bhakti Yoga the devotee makes absolute and unreserved self-surrender. He dependsupon the Lord for everything. He is extremely humble and meek. He develops devotion to the Lordgradually to a very high degree by repeating His Name, by studying the holy scriptures and bypractising the nine modes of devotion.
Hearing the Name of the Lord, singing His glories, remembering His Presence, serving His
Lotus Feet, bowing before Him, worshipping Him, attending on Him, loving Him as a friend, andsurrendering the self entirely to Him, are the nine modes of devotion. The devotee observesausterities, prays frequently to Him and offers mental worship. He serves his fellow-men, realisingthat the Lord alone dwells in the hearts of all. This is the Sadhana for those who wish to tread thepath of the Yoga of devotion.
Bhakti is a means to an end. It gives purity of mind and removes mental oscillation or
tossing of the mind. Sakama Bhakti or devotion with expectation brings Swarga for the devotee,while Nishkama Bhakti or devotion without any expectation, brings purity of the mind and Jnana.
The student treading the path of Raja Yoga has to ascend the spiritual ladder step by step,
stage by stage. There are eight limbs in Raja Yoga. They are Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama,Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi. By practising Yama and Niyama at the outset, thestudent gets ethical training and purification of the mind. By developing friendship, mercy andcomplacency, he destroys hatred, jealousy and harshness of heart and thereby gets peace of mind.By practising Asanas, he steadies his posture and gets control and mastery over his body. Then hepractises Pranayama to remove the tossing of the mind and destroy inertia. His body becomes lightand elastic. By practising Pratyahara or withdrawal of the senses from sense-objects, he getsstrength and peace of mind. Now he is fit for concentration, which comes by itself. He practisesmeditation and enters into Samadhi. By the combined practice of concentration, meditation andSamadhi, known as Yogic Samyama, he gets various psychic powers. By concentration on thesenses, egoism and mind, he gets various powers and experiences. He now sees without eyes, tasteswithout tongue, hears without ears, smells without a nose and feels without a skin. He can workmiracles. He simply wills and everything comes into being.
Those who follow the path of Jnana Yoga or Vedanta should first acquire the “four means of
salvation”—Viveka, Vairagya, Shad-Sampat and Mumukshutva.
Viveka is discrimination between the Real and the unreal. Vairagya is indifference or
dispassion towards sensual objects herein and hereafter. Shad-Sampat is the sixfold virtue, namely,Sama or calmness of mind, Dama or restraint of the senses, Uparati or satiety, Titiksha or power ofendurance, Shraddha or faith, and Samadhana or one-pointedness of mind.
Mumukshutwa is intense longing for liberation. Having acquired these “four means of
salvation”, the students of Jnana Yoga should approach a Brahma-Nishtha Guru who has fullyrealised the Supreme Self, and hear the scriptures directly from his lips. Then they should reflectand meditate on what they have heard and attain Self-realisation. Now the Jnani exclaims inexuberant joy, “The Atman alone is! It is one without a second. I am Brahman. I am Shiva. I amHe.” He, the liberated soul, sees the Self in all beings and all beings in the Self.
31KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book A Karma Yogi does self-sacrifice to kill his little self. A Bhakta practises self-surrender to
annihilate his egoism. A Jnani practises self-denial. The methods are different but all want to
destroy this little, self-arrogating “I” which is the root-cause of human suffering. When this is done,they meet at the same goal or point.
Karma, Bhakti and Yoga are means to the end. Jnana is the end. Just as rivers join the sea, so
also Karma, Bhakti and Yoga join the ocean of Jnana.
Karma Yoga prepares the mind for the reception of light or knowledge. It expands the heart
and breaks all the barriers that stand in the way of unity or oneness. Bhakti and meditation are alsomental Karmas. There can be no Jnana without Yoga. The fruit of Bhakti is Jnana. Have youunderstood now the nature of the four Yogas and their interrelation?
You should have your own ideal in life and exert in the accomplishment of this ideal. People
vary in their capacities, in mental and intellectual calibre, and in physical and mental strength to dothings. Therefore, different people should have different ideals. Then only can they evolve quickly.Then alone will they realise sure and rapid progress. The ideal of one man will not suit another. Ifone keeps an ideal that he cannot realise, an ideal that is beyond his reach and capacity, he will bedisappointed. He will give up his effort and become Tamasic.
You should have your own ideal. You may realise this ideal this moment or after ten years
with faltering steps. It does not matter much. Every man should endeavour to live up to his ideal. Heshould put his whole energy, nerve-force and will in the realisation of his ideal. You can chalk outyour own ideal yourself according to your own standard. If you are unable to do this, have yourguide to select for you the ideal that is suited to your capacity and standard.
One man may say, “I will teach the village boys and give them free education. This is my
ideal in life.” Another may say, “I will serve the sick and nurse them carefully. I will join acharitable institution and give my service till the end of my life. The service of sick persons is myideal.” A third man may say, “I will beg from door to door and start a feeding scheme formendicants and Sannyasins. This is my ideal.” A fourth man may say, “My ideal is Self-realisation.I will go to Gangotri and live in a cave and do sincere meditation. This is my ideal.”
All are quite correct according to their individual capacity and standard. You must
gradually bring up or change the ideal to realisation of Truth or Brahman. The highest ideal of manis Self-realisation. Service, worship and the rest eventually result in the realisation of the inner Self.The ideal to have ethical perfection is just below the ideal of Self-realisation, but it leads toSelf-realisation.
One should not treat a man who has a low ideal with contempt. He may be a baby-soul who
is just crawling now on the moral or spiritual path. Your duty is to help him in all possible manner inthe realisation or accomplishment of his ideal. You should give him all encouragement in hissincere endeavour to live up to his own highest ideal.
It is highly deplorable to note that the vast majority of persons have no ideal at all. Even
educated persons do not cherish any ideal. They lead an aimless life and are therefore drifted hither
32ALL ROADS LEAD TO ROMEThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book and thither like a piece of straw. They make no progress in life. Is this not a very sad plight? It is
highly deplorable indeed. It is very difficult to get a human birth and yet people do not realise theimportance of keeping an ideal and living up to it. The ideal of “eat, drink and be merry” is adoptedby the epicureans, gluttons and rich people. This school of thought has countless followers and thenumber is increasing daily by leaps and bounds. This was the ideal of Virochana. This is the ideal ofthe demons and demoniacal people. This ideal will lead a man to the darkest regions of misery andsorrow.
Blessed is the man who keeps his ideal and struggles hard to live up to it, for he will soon
attain God-realisation! Glory unto sincere, struggling souls!
9
MODERATION: THE WATCHWORD IN YOGA
Verily, Yoga is not possible for him who eats too much, nor for him who does not eat at
all, nor for him who sleeps too much, nor for him who is always awake, O Arjuna!
Yoga becomes the destroyer of pain for him who is moderate in eating and recreation,
who is moderate in exertion in actions, who is moderate in sleep and in wakefulness.
(VI-16 & 17)
Moderation is an important virtue which has to be cultivated by a spiritual aspirant.
Moderation is freedom from excess in anything. Moderation is really calmness of mind.Moderation is equanimity. Moderation is skill in Yoga. Without moderation, no success is possiblein Yoga and in material pursuits also. All the past luminaries of the world had observed moderation.
You should be moderate in eating, drinking, sleeping, reading, laughing, copulation, talking
and exercise. If you eat too much you will get too drowsy. Various diseases of the stomach,intestines and the liver will develop. All the internal organs will be overtaxed. Too much sleep willmake you dull and Tamasic. Too much copulation will drain your energy and cause weakness, lowvitality and diseases. Too much talking will disturb your peace of mind and cause exhaustion also.Lord Buddha plunged into extreme austerities in the beginning of his spiritual practices. He gave upfood entirely. He did too rigorous austerities. He suffered very much. His body became emaciated.He did not make much spiritual progress. Then he discontinued his severe austerities and adhered tothe golden medium. He began to take food in moderation. He regulated his spiritual practices. Onlythen did he attain illumination. He always taught his disciples to stick to the middle path only. Helearnt his lessons from experience.
It becomes difficult for some to control the tongue. If the dishes are palatable, they go
beyond the limits of moderation. They overload the stomach. College students who have plenty ofmoney often go to a sweetmeat shop and consume sweetmeats for Rs.5 at a time. They cannot get uptill the stomach is completely filled. Complete filling of the stomach is unhygienic and unscientific.
33KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Half the stomach only should be filled with food, and a quarter with water. The remaining quarter
should be left free for the expansion of gas. This is moderation in diet. You can check overloadingof the stomach through complete fasting on Ekadasi days and by taking only milk and fruitoccasionally.
Always get up from the table when there is still a little inclination to eat more. Giving up of
salt for two or three days in a week will help you to reduce the quantity of food. Reduction of foodwill not kill you. On the contrary, it will keep you quite healthy. It will help you to attain longevity.
Some aspirants give up their food and try to live on neem leaves for forty days. This is
foolish austerity. They fall sick, become weak and are not able to do any Sadhana. Do not spoil yourhealth in the name of austerities. Do not go to extremes in anything.
Some students begin to study hard, forcing away sleep with strong tea and thus burning the
midnight oil before appearing for the final examination. They lead a happy-go-lucky life for tenmonths before the examination. This is very bad. This is why they fall sick on account of unduestrain during the period of the examination. Study should be well regulated. You should prepareyour lessons thoroughly daily.
Some people make friendship with others quickly. They love intensely for some time and
then break it quickly on account of some trivial causes. They are extreme in their manifestation ofemotions. They either love intensely or hate intensely. The emotions also must be well controlled.Do not move too much with anybody. Be moderate in this direction also. You can then keep lastingfriendship with everybody.
Be moderate in your expenses also. Regulate it. Some are imprudent. They thoughtlessly
spend too much in one month and borrow in the next.
Be moderate in thinking. Kill all irrelevant, nonsensical, loose thoughts. Do not think too
much. Entertain sublime, divine thoughts.
Be moderate in work. Do not overwork. Overwork is the cause of many diseases. If you
overwork, you cannot pray and meditate.
Sadhana also must be well regulated. The period of meditation must be increased gradually.
The period of Sirshasana should be increased with care. The reduction of sleep also should begradual. When Sadhana is done by fits and starts there will be no spiritual progress.
The nervous system is extremely sensitive. It responds even to very slight changes and
causes distraction of the mind. It is therefore very necessary that you should lead a well regulatedand disciplined life and be moderate in everything.
Sleep and wake up at the prescribed time. Sleep at 9 p.m. or 10 p.m. and get up at 3 a.m. or 4
a.m. If you sleep too much you will be lethargic. The mind will become dull and the body heavy.You cannot meditate then. If you sleep too little you will experience drowsiness. You will sleep
34MODERATION: THE WATCHWORD IN YOGAThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book during meditation. Keep the golden medium. You will then have rapid progress in Yoga. You will
attain success in Yoga, which will kill all sorts of pains and sorrows in this life itself.
He who is moderate in everything is a perfect Yogi. He enjoys happiness here and in the
next world also. He moves about happily and is always cheerful. He keeps up perfect health and ahigh standard of vigour, vim and vitality. He attains longevity and fame. He attains spiritual andmaterial success.
Therefore, stick to the golden or happy medium. Follow the middle path always. Give up
extremes in everything and be happy for ever.
May moderation be your motto and ideal!
10
PURITY OF FOOD
The foods which increase life, purity, strength, health, joy and cheerfulness, which are
savoury and oleaginous, substantial and agreeable, are dear to the Sattwic.
The foods that are bitter, sour, saline, excessively hot, pungent, dry and burning are
liked by the Rajasic, and are productive of pain, grief and disease.
That which is stale, tasteless, putrid and rotten, refuse and impure, is the food liked by
the Tamasic.
(XVII-8, 9 & 10)
A diet that is wholly conducive to the practice of Yoga and spiritual progress is called Yogic
diet. Diet has an intimate connection with the mind. The mind is formed of the subtlest essence offood. Sage Uddalaka instructs his son Swetaketu: “Food, when consumed, becomes threefold—thegross particles become excrement, the middling ones flesh, and the fine ones the mind. My child,when curd is churned, its fine particles which rise upwards, form butter. Thus, my child, when foodis consumed, the fine particles, which rise upwards form the mind. Hence, the mind is verily food”.
Diet is of three kinds—Sattwic, Rajasic and Tamasic. Milk, barley, wheat, cereals, butter,
cheese, tomatoes, almonds, dates, fruit, honey and sugar-candy are all Sattwic foodstuffs. Theyrender the mind pure and calm.
Fish, eggs, meat, salt, chillies and asafoetida are Rajasic foodstuffs. They excite passion.
Beef, wine, garlic, onions and tobacco are Tamasic foodstuffs. They fill the mind with anger,darkness and inertia.
35KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book An aspirant should be very careful in the selection of articles of a Sattwic nature, especially
in the beginning of his Sadhana period. Later on, when perfection is attained, drastic dietetic
restrictions can be removed.
Sour, hot, pungent and bitter preparations, salt, mustard, asafoetida, chillies, tamarind, sour
curd, chutney, meat, eggs, fish, garlic, onions, alcoholic liquors, acidic things, stale food, over-ripeor unripe fruit and other articles that disagree with one’s system should be avoided entirely.
Rajasic food distracts the mind. It excites passion. Give up salt. It excites passion and
emotion. Giving up of salt helps in the control of the palate and thereby the mind. The will-power isalso developed. Snake bite and scorpion sting will have no influence on a man who has given upsalt. Onions and garlic are worse than meat.
Purity of food leads to purity of the mind. Sattwic food helps meditation. The discipline of
food is very necessary for the successful practice of Yogic Sadhana. If the palate is controlled, thenall the other senses are also controlled.
Food plays an important part in meditation. Different foods produce different effects on
different compartments of the brain. For the practice of meditation the food should be light,nutritious and Sattwic. Milk, fruit, almonds, butter, sugar-candy, green gram, Bengal gram soakedin water overnight, and bread are all very helpful in meditation. Thed, a kind of root that is available
in abundance in the Himalayan regions, is also very Sattwic. Tea and sugar should be taken inmoderation. It is better if you can give them up entirely. Dried ginger powder can be mixed withmilk and taken frequently. Indian Yogis like this very much. Another health-giving stuff ismyrobalan of the yellow variety. It should be chewed now and then. In the Ashtanga Hridaya of
Vagbhatacharya, it is represented as even superior to a nourishing mother. It takes care of the bodybetter than a mother does. A mother gets annoyed with her child sometimes, but myrobalan alwayskeeps an even temperament and is cheerful and enthusiastic in attending to the well-being of humanbeings. It preserves semen and stops all nocturnal emissions. Potatoes boiled without salt, or baked,are also an excellent food for practitioners.
A beginner should be careful in choosing foodstuffs of a Sattwic nature. Food exercises a
tremendous influence on the mind. You can see it so obviously in everyday life. It is very difficult tocontrol the mind after a heavy, sumptuous, indigestible, rich meal. The mind runs, wanders andjumps about like an ape all the time. Alcohol causes great excitement of the mind.
The diet should be such as can maintain both physical efficiency and good health. The
well-being of an individual depends more upon perfect nutrition than on anything else. Varioussorts of intestinal diseases, increased susceptibility to infectious diseases, a lack of high vitality andpower of resistance, rickets, scurvy, anaemia or poverty of the blood, and beri-beri are all due tofaulty nutrition. It should be remembered that it is not so much the climate as food which plays thevital role in producing a strong, healthy body or a weakling suffering from a host of diseases. Anappreciable knowledge of the science of dietetics is essential for everybody, especially for spiritualaspirants, to maintain physical efficiency and good health. Aspirants should be able to make up acheap and well-balanced meal from only certain articles of diet. What is needed is a well-balanceddiet, not a rich one. A rich diet produces diseases of the liver, kidneys and pancreas. A
36PURITY OF FOODThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book well-balanced diet helps a man to grow and also to turn out more work. It increases his body-weight
and keeps up efficiency, stamina and a high standard of vim and vigour.
You are what you eat. The diet should be fresh, simple, light, bland, wholesome, easily
digestible and nutritious. All articles that are putrid, stale, decomposed, unclean, twice cooked orkept overnight, should be abandoned.
Gluttons and epicureans cannot dream of getting success in Yoga. He who takes a moderate
diet, who has regulated his diet, can become a Yogi, not others.
Man has invented so many kinds of dishes just to satisfy his palate, and has thus made life
complex and miserable. He calls himself civilised when he is really ignorant and deluded by hissenses. His mind gets upset when he cannot get his usual dishes in a new place. Is this real strength?He has become an absolute slave of his tongue. This is very deplorable. Be natural and simple ineating and drinking. Moderation is Yoga. Eat to live and do not live to eat. Follow this golden ruleand be happy. You can then devote more time to Yogic practices.
The vast majority of people dig their graves with their teeth. No rest is given to the stomach.
After all, man wants very little on this bountiful earth—a little bread, a little butter and some coldwater. This will amply suffice to keep life going. On the contrary, people stuff their stomachs withall sorts of things, both edible and inedible, on account of the force of habit, even when there is noappetite. This is very bad. All diseases take their origin from overloading the stomach. Hunger isthe best sauce. If there is hunger, food can be digested well. If you have no appetite, do not takeanything. Let the stomach enjoy a full holiday!
A variety of dishes overworks the stomach, induces a capricious appetite and renders the
palate fastidious. Then it becomes difficult to please the palate. Therefore, control the palate first,then all the other senses can be easily controlled.
Heavy food leads to a Tamasic state and induces sleep only. There is a general
misapprehension that a large quantity of food is necessary for health and strength. Much dependsupon the power of assimilation and absorption. Generally, in the vast majority of cases, most of thefood passes away undigested along with the faeces. Take half a stomachful of wholesome food. Filla quarter with pure water and leave the rest free for the expansion of gas. This is moderation.Moderation plays a vital part in keeping up perfect health. Almost all diseases are due toirregularity of meals, overeating and unwholesome food. Eating all things at all times like a monkeyis highly dangerous. Such a man can become a Rogi or sick man easily; but he can never become aYogi.
A glutton cannot at the very outset have diet regulations and observe moderation. He should
try to be moderate gradually. First, let him take a lesser quantity twice as usual. Then, instead of theusual heavy night meal, let him take fruit and milk alone for a number of days. In due course he cancompletely avoid the night meal and try to take fruit and milk during the daytime. Those who dointense Sadhana must take milk alone. It is a perfect food by itself. If necessary they can take someeasily digestible fruit. If a glutton takes to a fruit or milk diet all of a sudden, every moment he will
37KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book desire to eat something or the other. This is not good. Once again I reiterate: gradual practice is
necessary.
Evolution is better than revolution. You should not make sudden changes in anything,
particularly in matters pertaining to food and drink. Let the change be slow and gradual. The systemshould accommodate it without any trouble. Natura non facit saltum —Nature never moves by
leaps.
A vegetarian diet has been acclaimed to be the most conducive to spiritual and psychic
advancement. It has been found that meat augments animal passion and decreases the intellectualcapacity. While the people in meat-eating countries are physically active and strong, the samecannot be said of their spiritual attainments. Meat is not at all necessary for the maintenance ofperfect health, vigour and vitality. On the contrary, it is highly deleterious to health. It brings in itstrain a host of ailments such as tapeworm, albuminuria and other diseases of the kidneys. Thekilling of animals for food is a great sin. Instead of killing egoism and the idea of “I”-ness and“mine”-ness, ignorant people kill innocent animals under the pretext of making a sacrifice to thegoddess. In reality it is meant to satisfy the palate only. What inhuman and horrible crimes are beingcommitted in the name of God and religion! Ahimsa is the first virtue that a spiritual aspirant shouldtry to possess. He should have reverence for life.
Lord Jesus says: “Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy”. Mahavira shouted
in a trumpet-like voice: “Regard every living being as thyself and harm none”. The law of Karma isinexorable, unrelenting and immutable. The pain you inflict upon another will surely rebound uponyou, and the happiness you radiate will come back to you, adding to your own happiness. He whoknows this law will not hurt anybody.
The eating of meat and alcoholism are closely allied. The craving for liquor dies a natural
death if meat is withdrawn from one’s diet. The question of birth-control becomes very difficult inthe case of those who take meat. To them mind-control is next to impossible. Mark how the tiger,eating meat, and the cow or elephant, living on green grass, are poles apart! The one is wild andferocious while the other is mild and peaceful.
The first and foremost step in the spiritual advancement of an aspirant is the giving up of
meat. The Divine Light will not descend if the stomach is loaded with meat. In large meat-eatingcountries, the cancer mortality is extremely high. Vegetarians keep up sound health till old age.Even in the West, doctors in hospitals are putting their patients on a regimen of vegetable diet. Thepatients convalesce quickly. It is a welcome sign to see that at least in some of the countries ofEurope, vegetarian hotels are springing up in amazing numbers, and it is not too much to expect thatin the course of a decade or two the Westerners will become quite a different race of peoplealtogether in their food, dress, manners, habits and social customs.
Aspirants should avoid narcotics like coffee, tea, alcohol and tobacco. They stimulate the
senses. Our senses are compared to restive horses and they become uncontrollable when we takenarcotics. You should control the senses by refraining from taking narcotics. We are all slaves ofour senses more or less, and the senses in turn are the slaves of the narcotics. If you really crave forperfection, control of mind and success in Yoga, avoid these narcotics by all possible means.
38PURITY OF FOODThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Manu, Jesus and Buddha exhorted the people to refrain from using liquors, intoxicants and
drugs as these are deleterious in their effects. No spiritual progress is possible without abandoning
them.
Boil half a litre of milk along with some boiled rice, ghee and sugar. This is called cheru. It
is an excellent food for Yogis. This is for daytime. For the evening meal, half a litre of milk will do.
Milk is the best food for Yogis but even a small quantity is harmful to some and may not
agree with all constitutions. If one form of diet is not suitable, or if you feel constipated, change thediet and try some other Sattwic articles. This is common sense.
Milk should not be boiled too much. It should be removed from the fire as soon as the
boiling point is reached. Too much boiling destroys the nutritive principles and vitamins andrenders the milk quite useless.
A fruit diet exercises a benign influence on the constitution. This is a natural form of diet.
Fruit are very great energy-producers. A fruit and milk diet helps concentration and easy mentalfocussing. Barley, wheat, milk and ghee all promote longevity and increase one’s power and
strength. Fruit juice and the water wherein sugar-candy is dissolved are very good beverages.Butter mixed with sugar-candy, and almonds soaked in water, can be taken. These cool the system.
Do not fast too often. This might produce weakness. Occasional fasting once a month, or
when passion troubles you much, will suffice. During the fast you should not even think of thevarious articles of food. Constant thought of food during the fast cannot bring you the desiredresults. During the fast avoid company. Live alone. Utilise your time in Yogic Sadhana. After a fastdo not take any heavy food. Milk or some fruit juice is beneficial.
Do not make much fuss about your diet. You need not advertise to everyone if you are able
to pull on with a particular form of diet. The observance of such restraints is for your advancementon the spiritual path and you will not be spiritually benefited by giving publicity to your form ofSadhana.
There are many today who make it a profession to earn money and a livelihood by
performing some Asanas and Pranayama, or by having some diet regulation, such as eating onlyraw articles or leaves or roots. Such people cannot have any real spiritual growth. The goal of life isSelf-realisation. Aspirants should keep the goal always in view and do intense Sadhana by theprescribed methods.
Live a natural, simple life. Take simple food that is wholly agreeable to your system. You
should have your own menu to suit your constitution. You are yourself the best judge to select aSattwic diet. In the matter of food and drink, you will do well to eat and drink as a master. Youshould not have the least craving for any particular diet. You should not become a slave of this foodor that food. A simple, natural, non-stimulating, tissue-building, energy-producing diet, free fromalcohol, will keep the mind calm and pure and help you in your Yoga practices and in the attainmentof the goal of life, namely, God-realisation.
39KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 40This is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book In the world the environments are quite unfavourable. They excite, ignite and kindle the
nerves, the hidden past impressions, desires and the senses. For some months you may remain
secluded in a room and progress quite well with good concentration and meditation. All of a suddensome disturbance or the other comes and upsets your meditation. Your friends are your realenemies in a way. They drag you for some business or the other into the world. You are drawnforcibly through moral sentiments. It is irresistible. It is, of course, inevitable. You should see thisas a form of weakness on your part. To sacrifice your ideal for the sake of pleasing some of yourintimate friends is really far from commendable. By your mixing with these worldlings, your newspiritual impressions will get obliterated or effaced and you will find it extremely difficult to regainyour original state despite redoubled effort.
Mixing with worldly-minded persons is highly disastrous to an aspirant. The two currents
are diametrically opposite. A worldly-minded man and a spiritual aspirant move in diametricallyopposite directions. A worldly man is very fond of talking. He is garrulous. He suffers from lingualdiarrhoea. Gossip, idle talk, long talk, big talk, tall talk—all these afford him the greatest pleasure.The aspirant, on the other hand, is a man of few words, to the point, and that also on spiritualmatters. Worldly topics do not interest him at all. They give him acute pain. The mode of thoughtalso differs in the two cases. In the instance of a worldly man, his thought hovers around his wife,children and the way to amass wealth and get sensual pleasure. His thinking is shallow. An aspiranthas sublime thoughts about God. A worldly man always does an action with a selfish motive. Anaspirant does it unselfishly with a strong feeling that the whole world is nothing but his own Self. Ifa worldly man has Rs. 100 with him, he always thinks of saving for the future. An aspirant willspend the amount the same day. He is a man of simplicity.
A worldly man wants company but an aspirant should court solitude. He should remain
alone. This is very, very important. I have to emphatically assert again that solitude is a sine qua
non.I have to impress upon your mind that it is a great desideratum.
If you have once tasted properly and to the very depth the happiness of solitude, you will
never leave it at any cost. It is only those who have a preponderance of restless impressions thatflutter about from Brindavan to Varanasi, from Varanasi to Jagannath, like a wild butterfly.
Quiet, solitary places like Swarag Ashram, Rishikesh and Uttarkasi have a beautiful charm
of their own. This is indescribable, it has to be felt and understood by the subtle discriminativeintellect. A gross, worldly, practical intellect can never discriminate and understand the beauty andpeace of such remarkable places, the supreme abode of Rishis and sages. The spiritual vibrationsthat are present in these places can by themselves take a man to Samadhi without much effort. TheHimalayan vibrations and the soothing and soul-elevating influence of the holy Ganges can turn aninveterate atheist and materialist into a staunch spiritualist. Live for three months in these holyplaces and realise for yourself the charm, grandeur and benign influence of solitude.
Back to the point. In the world there are minds in various stages of growth. There are people
of diverse mentality. There is a multiplicity of minds. There are two sets of currents—the currentsof attraction and repulsion—in the mind. When you mix with people of a different mentality, youare naturally attracted towards some and also repelled by others. Secondly, there is the current ofjealousy also. When you see other persons who are in possession of higher virtues and assets, you
41KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book are naturally affected during your early stages of spiritual practice. These hostile currents are
unfavourable, so meditation suffers.
Further, when you mix, you have to talk much. You are forced to talk a lot. This means a
wastage of energy. All energies must be very carefully conserved by an aspirant. All the doorsthrough which energy leaks out should be rigidly shut through complete Pratyahara, through totalabstraction. Thirdly, if you do not know how to protect yourself, the Prana sheath, your valuablePrana, will pass away to other persons. Your magnetic aura, your mental aura and your Pranic aurawill flow to other weak persons. This is termed as vampirism. There will be considerable loss ofPrana. You must therefore know the process of protecting yourself by developing an auric shell.
A young mango nursery has to be fenced properly in the beginning. A small fire started by
the collection of a few dried leaves or bits of straw can be doubtlessly extinguished if you suddenlyintroduce a big log of wood in the fire. You are like the mango nursery, like the small fire, duringthe period of Sadhana. How can you withstand the hostile currents of the world? What you havegained in five years through hard practice will be irrecoverably lost in a month by promiscuousmixing with worldlings. Several persons have complained to me that they have lost the power ofconcentration by mixing and they cannot attain the same state that they had during seclusion.
You should not enter the world before five or six years of seclusion. You must test how you
fare when you enter the world. If you are not a bit affected, if you can keep up constant balance ofmind, if you can rest in the Atman, you can move about in the world. Otherwise, wait for some timemore in seclusion and continue Sadhana.
There is no harm in your mixing with a congenial person who is also devoted to meditation,
study and other spiritual pursuits, for one hour daily, and in whose company you experiencepleasure and elevation of thought. You can discuss various abstruse philosophical points. You willfind this useful. You can be in the company of higher, spiritual personages who enter into Samadhi.Their company will be highly beneficial. Instinct will speak aloud from within that such and suchcompany is elevating and such and such company is depressing. If you find that the company of acertain person gives the least depression, shun him from that very moment.
I know of several persons who have had a terrible downfall from their spiritual heights
owing to indiscriminate and promiscuous mixing. They entered the world hastily, without testingthemselves. They were reduced to a level worse than that of a worldly man. The old, evilimpressions wait for an opportunity of crushing you down. All the old desires return and attack youwith tremendous force. The cravings become intensified during the period of downfall. Theaspirant finds it difficult to rise again.
Everything should be done gradually. It is very difficult for a man who has been in the world
to shut himself completely in a room and observe silence also. It will be very painful andtroublesome for a beginner. He should slowly train himself. He should train the mind gradually byobserving silence once a week and remaining in the room for a certain number of hours. He shouldhave a walk in the evening along the banks of a river or along the seaside or any other suitable place.
42SECLUSION IS A ‘MUST’ IN SADHANAThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book For a Sadhu, fresh air, invigorating cold baths, an evening stroll and moderate exercise are
very essential. He cannot afford to have milk and ghee and has to depend upon help from Nature in a
variety of ways. All throughout the period of Sadhana, strong common sense should be exercised.
After a period of about two or three years he will be able to remain alone in a closed room allthroughout the day, because he now knows the process of reflection and meditation. He can spendsix hours in meditation and six hours in study. The mind will now be completely adjusted to the newlife. There will be no trouble. He will be highly delighted to remain alone always. He would not liketo be disturbed even for a day. He would not want to lose the peace and bliss of solitude. He dependsupon the Atman within for help, strength and happiness and not on the world outside. He has now achanged angle of vision and becomes a changed being. He has a changed psychology.Worldly-minded persons cannot properly comprehend his metamorphosed nature.
12
THE MYSTERY OF DEATH
Just as a man casts off worn-out clothes and puts on new ones, so also the embodied
Self casts off worn-out bodies and enters others which are new.
(II-22)
The innate question in all is: what remains after death? What becomes to the soul after the
death of the body? Where is the soul gone to? Does it still exist? All these questions arisespontaneously in all minds. These are momentous questions which touch the hearts of all deeply.The same questions arise today in all people and in all countries as they arose thousands of yearsago. No one can stop them. These questions are discussed today and they will be discussed in thefuture also. From ancient times, philosophers, sages, saints, Yogis, thinkers, Swamis, prophets andmetaphysicians have tried their best to solve the great problem of death.
When you lead a life of luxury, when you are rolling in wealth, you forget about the
phenomenon of death. But the moment you see one of your dearest relations snatched away by thecruel hand of death, you are at once struck with awe and wonder and reflect within yourself as towhere his soul has departed to. Does the soul still exist? Is there a soul independent of the body? Itcannot be totally annihilated. The past impressions and thoughts of the soul cannot die. You canovercome pain and sorrow if you know the true meaning of sorrow, pain, suffering and death. Thephenomenon of death sets the human mind thinking deeply. All philosophy originates from thephenomenon of death. Thus philosophy is really a study of death. The highest philosophy of Indiastarts with the subject of the problem of death. Study the Gita, theKathopanishad and also the
Chhandogya Upanishad which treat of it. Death is a call to reflect and to seek the goal of Truth, the
eternal Brahman.
According to Hinduism life is one continuous, never-ending process. All change is only a
change of environment and embodiment. The soul is immortal. It takes one form after another onaccount of its own actions. Hinduism is based on two fundamental doctrines, namely, the law of
43KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Karma and the law of transmigration. Death is only a necessary and a passing phenomenon. Just as
you move from one house into another, so also the soul passes from one body to another to gainexperience.
Death is nothing but a change of body. Death is the separation of the soul from the physical
body. Just as a man casting off worn-out garments puts on new ones, so also the dweller in thisbody, casting off worn-out bodies, enters into others which are new.
Every soul is a circle. The circumference of this circle is nowhere but its centre is in the
body. Death means a change of this centre from one body to another. Why then should you be afraidof death?
This physical body is composed of the five fundamental elements, namely, earth, water,
fire, air and ether. The gods are endowed with a divine and luminous body. The fire element ispredominant in them. In man the earth element preponderates. In the case of aquatic animals, theelement of water predominates. In the case of birds the element of air predominates.
The hardness of the body is due to a portion of the earth; the fluidity is due to a portion of
water; the warmth that you feel in the body is due to fire; moving to and fro and such other activitiesare due to air; space is due to ether. The individual soul is different from the five elements. The soulis the eternal Spirit. It is non-material. It is intelligence or consciousness.
The individual soul or Jivatma is an image or reflection of the Supreme Soul or Paramatma.
Just as the sun is reflected in different parts of water, so also the Supreme Soul is reflected in thedifferent minds of different persons.
The individual soul is reflected consciousness. It is this individual soul that departs from the
body after the death of the body and goes to heaven with the senses, mind, Prana, past impressions,desires and tendencies. It is endowed with a subtle body when it proceeds to heaven.
Just as there is the subtle bladder within a football, so also, within the gross physical body
there is another body—the subtle body or Linga Sarira. This subtle body comes out with all itsimpressions and tendencies at the time of death of the gross physical body. It is like vapour. Itcannot be seen by the physical eye. It is the subtle body that goes to heaven, it manifests again in agross form. This re-manifestation of the subtle form into the gross physical form is calledreincarnation. You may deny this law but it exists. It is inexorable and unrelenting. If you deny thelaw, it clearly shows that you are ignorant of it; it will surely operate whether you admit it or not.The light of the sun is there whether the owl accepts it or not.
A dead body cannot talk, walk or see. It remains like a log of wood after the soul has
departed from it. It is the soul that enlivens, moves and directs the body, mind and senses.
The soul, accompanied by the chief vital air (Mukhya Prana), the sense-organs and the
mind, and taking with itself ignorance, good and evil actions and the impressions left by itsprevious existences, leaves its former body and obtains a new one.
44THE MYSTERY OF DEATHThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book When the soul passes from one body to another, it is enveloped by the subtle parts of the
elements which are the seeds of the new body. The soul has a vision of the body to come. Just as a
leech or a caterpillar takes hold of another object before it leaves its hold of the first one, so also thesoul visualises the body to come before it leaves the present one.
Just as a leech supported on a straw goes to the end of it and then takes hold of another
support by contracting itself, so does the self throw its body aside and, making it senseless, takeshold of another support after contracting itself. Just as a goldsmith takes apart a little quantity ofgold and fashions a newer and better form, so does the self throw off this body and, making itsenseless, takes on another, a newer and better form, for its enjoyment in the world of the manes,celestials, gods or Hiranyagarbha.
The Jiva has adopted the whole universe as its means to the realisation of the fruit of its
actions. It goes from one body to another to fulfil this object. Therefore, the whole universe,impelled by the work of the Jiva, waits for it with the requisite means for the realisation of the fruitof its work made ready. The Satapatha Brahmana says: “A man is born into the body that has been
made for him.”
When the king of a country pays a visit to some place within his kingdom, the leaders of the
particular village, anticipating his arrival, wait on him with a variety of food and drink and providehim with beautiful mansions. They say, “Here he comes, here he comes.” Similarly the elementsand the presiding Deities like Indra and the rest, who help the organs of the body to function, waitupon the departing self with the means of enjoying the fruit of its works. They secure for the soul asuitable body to enjoy the fruit of its actions.
Desire is the root-cause of transmigration. Being a slave of desires, the individual soul
attains those results to which its subtle body or mind is attached. Exhausting in heaven the fruit ofwhatever actions it did in its life it returns from that world to this for fresh work. Thus does the mantransmigrate who is a slave of desires. But the man who does not desire never transmigrates. Hewho is free from desire, the objects of whose desires have been attained, and to whom all objects ofdesire are but the Self—in his case, the organs do not depart. Being but Brahman, he is merged inBrahman.
45KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 13
A DYING MAN’S THOUGHTS
And whosoever, leaving the body, goes forth remembering Me alone at the time of
death, he attains My Being; there is no doubt about this.
Whosoever at the end leaves the body, thinking upon any being, to that being only he
goes, O Kaunteya, because of his constant thought of that being!
(VIII-5 & 6)
Only the most prominent thought of one’s life occupies the mind of a person at the time of
death. The predominant thought at the time of death is what in normal life had occupied the
person’s attention most.
The last thought of a licentious man will be the thought of his woman. The last thought of an
inveterate drunkard will be that of his peg of liquor. The last thought of a greedy moneylender willbe that of his money. The last thought of a fighting soldier will be that of killing his enemy. The lastthought of a mother who has been intensely attached to her only son will be that of her son only.
I once saw a dying man who had been having the habit of using snuff. When he was in an
unconscious state, he used to move his fingers towards the nose very often and do imaginarysniffing. Obviously he was having the thought of snuff in his last moments. A medical officer of ahospital used all sorts of abusive and obscene terms when he was in a dying condition.
The last and most powerful thought that occupies the mind of a man in his dying moment
determines the nature of his next birth. The last thought determines the nature or character of thebody to be attained next. The last thought of a man governs his future destiny. As a man thinketh, soshall he become.
If the thought of tea comes into your mind at the moment of death, you may become the
manager of a tea estate in your next birth, provided you had done virtuous actions. You may be bornas a labourer in the tea estate if you had not done any meritorious actions.
Desire is endless. Therefore, man cannot gratify all his desires in just one birth. At the time
of death, the whole storehouse of impressions and desires is churned and the strongest and mostcherished desire comes to the surface of the mind or the field of mental consciousness. Thus thechurned-up cream of cherished desires arrests the attention of the dying man for immediategratification. He thinks of that only at the time of death. Just as the most vital mango plant shoots upprominently in the nursery, so also the strongest desire shoots up to the surface of the mind. If thedesire is not gratified, the mind gets saturated with that desire and it is gratified in his next birth.This desire will become very prominent in his next birth.
46A DYING MAN’S THOUGHTSThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book King Bharata, the son of Rishaba, renounced his kingdom and took to the life of an ascetic.
One day he observed a small motherless deer in distress. He took pity on the poor creature and loved
it so passionately that his thoughts were mainly centred on it, with the result that he completelyforgot about God. At the time of his death the thought of the little deer harassed him much and hehad to take the birth of a deer in his subsequent incarnation.
King Bharata had been well versed in all the scriptures, in the Vedas and in the Puranas. He
had performed very rigorous austerities and had meditated on the Lotus Feet of the gloriousVasudeva. But the inordinate attachment to the animal gave him the birth of a deer. Bharatarecognised his folly during his life as a deer and remembered every detail of his past life as KingBharata. As a deer he ever meditated on the Lord, ate but little and never mixed with the other deer.He was actually counting the number of his days on earth to get freedom from the low birth.
After departing from its body, the deer again took birth, this time as a Brahmin by the name
Jada Bharata. Now Jada Bharata grew wise enough not to commit the same mistake once again, andfrom his very boyhood kept himself aloof. He had a mind free from attraction and repulsion. Thus,he escaped the clutches of Maya and, at the dissolution of his mortal sheath, attained oneness withBrahman.
I shall tell you another story. Ajamila lost his pious conduct and led a detestable life. He fell
into the evil depths of sinful habits and resorted to theft and robbery. He became the slave of apublic woman. He had ten children, the last of whom was called Narayana.
When Ajamila was about to die, he was absorbed in the thought of his last son, whom he
loved dearly. Three fearful messengers of the God of Death advanced towards him. In greatdistress, Ajamila cried out aloud for his son Narayana. On the mere mention of the name ofNarayana, the attendants of Lord Narayana came speedily along and obstructed the messengers ofdeath. They took Ajamila to the abode of Lord Narayana.
Ordinarily, a dying man is haunted by various horrible thoughts. He cannot concentrate his
mind on God. His mind will be clouded by innumerable thoughts. He will be thinking: “Who willlook after my young wife and children if I die? What will become of my property? Who will realisethe outstanding dues from the debtors? I have not finished such and such work. The second son is
not married. The work is half finished; many law-suits are pending judgment .”Thus reviewing the
actions of his whole life and thinking of the future, he will feel miserable.
It is very difficult to keep up God-consciousness at the time of death when diseases torment
the body, when the consciousness begins to fade. Some people think: “Why should a man become a
Sadhu and spend his life in the Himalayas? What is wanted is that one should think of God at thetime of death. This can be done even at home.” This is a mistake. The last thought will be that ofGod only in the case of the man who has disciplined his mind all throughout his life and has tried tofix his mind on the Lord through constant practice. This last thought of God cannot come throughstray practice of a day or two. It cannot come in a week or a month. It is a lifelong endeavour andstruggle.
47KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book The thought of God comes to a man at the time of death only through the Grace of the Lord.
You have to keep up the practice of remembrance through repetition of the Divine Name. This has
to be carried on every hour, every second, for days and months. When a strong habit is formed bymeans of unceasing practice through the period of one’s life then it will be easy for one to rememberGod at the time of death.
Pursuing worldly activities throughout the day and sleeping at night, you will find no time
to think of God at all. Even if you do Japa and prayer for ten or fifteen minutes daily but spend therest of the time in worldly activities, you cannot make very great spiritual advancement. Therefore,the remembrance of God should be constant so that the thought of Him may come automatically atthe time of death as well.
A devotee says to the Lord, “O Lord, let me enter the cool shade of your Lotus Feet this very
day, when my senses are strong, when my memory is good! When the intellect is perturbed andperverted at the time of death, it may be carried away by the threefold diseases of the body.” Eventhe most devout aspirant may fail to think of the Lord at the time of death due to the weakness of thephysical body.
That is the reason why the Gita, Bhagavata, Vishnu Sahasranamam and other holy
scriptures are recited at the deathbed of a sick person. Even though he may not be able to speak, hemay hear what is read out to him. This will help him to forget the body and his ailment and enablehim to think of God. Man always desires to die a peaceful death, with his mind fixed on God. Whenhis memory fails, these sacred sentences of the scriptures will remind him of his real nature.
If holy books are read and his interest in the glory of God is aroused, there will be every
possibility of the dying man forgetting his worldly attachments. The relatives gathered around himshould not begin to weep. If they do so, his mind will be afflicted all the more. On the other hand,they should encourage him to think of God alone. When the mind of the sick person is thusgradually turned away from the network of worldly matters and centred on the picture of the Lord oron His glories and teachings, all favourable conditions are thereby created for the passing of hislife-breath. The mind also peacefully alights on the thought of God.
The dying man will then repent for his follies and pray to God sincerely. Sincere prayers can
undo the evil effects of bad Karmas. Discrimination and dispassion will dawn in him instantly. Ifreal discrimination and dispassion dawn in him at the time of death, it will be enough to give him thesolace which the soul strives for.
May you all realise God in this very birth by constant remembrance of Him! May He appear
before you at the time of your departure from this body!
48A DYING MAN’S THOUGHTSThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 14
SPIRITUAL EVOLUTION
But the Yogi who strives with assiduity, purified from sins and perfected through
many births, reaches the highest goal.
(VI-45)
Man can hardly attain perfection in one life. He has to develop his heart, intellect and hand.
He has to mould his character in a perfect manner. He has to develop various virtuous qualities such
as mercy, tolerance, love, forgiveness, equal vision and courage. He has to learn many lessons andgain experiences in this great world-school. Therefore, he has to take many lives. Reincarnation isquite true. One small life is a part of a long series that stretches behind you and in front of you. Thisshort span is quite insignificant. One gains a little experience only. He evolves very little. Duringthe course of one life, man does many evil actions. He does very few good actions. Very few die asgood men.
Christians believe that one life determines and settles everything. How could this be? How
can the everlasting future of man be made to depend on one small insignificant life? If in this life hebelieves in Christ, he will get eternal peace in heaven; if he is an unbeliever in the present life, hewill get eternal damnation. He will be thrown for ever in the lake of fire or into a horrible hell. Is thisnot the most irrational doctrine? Should he not get his chances for correction and improvement?The doctrine of reincarnation is quite rational. It gives ample chances for man’s growth,rectification and gradual evolution.
The word “transmigration” means “passing from one life to another”. The one great and
fundamental tenet of most schools of Indian philosophy, with the exception of the Charvaka ormaterialist school, is the firm belief in the immortality of the soul. The soul passes through anumber of lives for attaining perfection. This is technically called “transmigration of souls”.
Belief in metempsychosis or the transmigration of the soul dates from primeval times. It is
as early as primitive man. One solution to the great mystery of death and a consoling thought aboutit is the indestructibility of the soul, and its existence after death in other forms. In India, the ancientAryans found in it the solution to the age-long problem of human suffering, and developed it into avery distinct religious doctrine.
The purpose of transmigration is not reward or punishment but betterment and perfection. It
prepares the human being for the ultimate realisation which frees him from the cycle of births anddeaths. It is not possible to achieve perfection and absolute freedom without a plurality of lives.
Man develops tendencies and aptitudes in several births and becomes a genius in one birth.
Lord Buddha gained experiences in several births, but he became a Buddha only in his last birth. Inone birth only all the virtues cannot be developed, but one can cultivate them by means of gradualevolution.
49KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book The human body is only a vesture and a dwelling place for the immortal soul. The soul can
certainly re-inhabit another dwelling place and put on another vesture in order to develop and
realise better than before the divine plan and purpose for it. The creator has so planned it. The soulof a depraved and corrupted human being is given another training in another body. The evolutionof all beings is for a better condition. Evolution to the higher life and not deterioration to the loweris generally the law and principle of Nature though there are exceptions to the general rule.
The soul, armed with the little virtue and divinity gained in the previous existence, enters
another life to increase, improve and develop that original stock. There is now a much greaterresponse of the body controlled by the soul. It responds to God, to goodness, truth, holiness andother attributes of God.
The enlightening influence of Yogis and sages and their life and teachings assert themselves
more and more in the new life. The light of God is more sought after and gravitation towards Himbecomes stronger and stronger. More and more the life gets fitted to see God and hear His voice.
The process of transmigration continues—we cannot say through how many lives—until
the soul, purged of all its impurities and having acquired a true and full knowledge of theimperishable Self through the practice of Yoga, attains final emancipation and enjoys perfect,eternal bliss. It has now attained perfect union with the Supreme Self.
When knowledge of the Self is attained, there is no more transmigration. Mother Prakriti’s
work is now over. She unravels all the experiences of this world to the individual soul and takes ithigher and higher through various bodies till it regains its essential divine nature, till it merges itselfin the Supreme Self or Para Brahman.
Even the least effort in the direction of Yoga never goes in vain. You will realise thereby the
fruit of even that little Yogic practice. If you have succeeded in the practice of the first three limbsof Yoga, namely, Yama, Niyama and Asana in this birth, you will begin your practice in the nextbirth from the fourth limb, namely, Pranayama.
The Vedantin who has acquired the first two means—Viveka and Vairagya—in this birth,
will start his practice in the next from the third means, namely, Shad Sampat. Therefore, do not bediscouraged even a bit if you fail to attain final liberation in this birth. Even a little practice for ashort period will give you more strength, peace, joy and knowledge.
50SPIRITUAL EVOLUTIONThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 15
THE SAINT OF TOMORROW
Even if the most sinful worships Me, with devotion to none else, he too should indeed
be regarded as righteous, for he has rightly resolved .
(IX-30)
Even if thou art the most sinful of all sinners, yet thou shalt verily cross all sins by the
raft of knowledge.
(IV-36)
Thoughts of sin haunt the minds of some persons. One man always thinks: “I have
committed a very heinous sin. I do not know what to do.” Again and again this one idea or thought
haunts his mind. This is an undesirable habit. Such people do not know how to divert their mind.They become a prey to these haunting thoughts.
Virtue and vice are relative terms. They are creations of the mind. Sin is nothing but a
mistake committed by the soul during the course of its evolution. The repetition of God’s Name,charity and fasting will destroy at once any amount of sins. Why are you afraid then? Even the worstsinner can attain salvation and become a holy of holies. What was the state of Valmiki, Jagai andMadhai in the beginning? What was the condition of Ajamila? Were they not rogues of the firstorder? Repeat Om or Ram and assert boldly: “I am pure now. I am holy now.” Nil desperandum .
Where is there room for despair? Do virtuous actions. Remember the Lord always. Be true to theinner witness, the Indweller of your heart.
Only an ignorant man says, “I am a great sinner.” This is a serious mistake. Never for a
moment think that you are a sinner. You are the holiest person. You are the ever-pure Atman. Sincannot touch you. You are above virtue and vice. Virtue and vice are mental creations only. Sins aremistakes only. An ignorant Jiva commits these mistakes during the course of its journey in thisworld on account of ignorance. Through mistakes it gains experiences and marches forward on thespiritual path. Every mistake is your best teacher. One has to evolve through sins and mistakes.They are inevitable.
Whenever thoughts of this kind worry you, think: “I am doing Japa of Om. This will burn all
the old, sinful actions. This will purify me. I am performing austerities. I fast and give in charity.These are all great purifiers. I am becoming purer and purer. Nothing can affect me now. I am likethe effulgent fire or the sun. I am becoming a holy person.” Assert whenever negative thoughts ofsin trouble you: “I am the ever-pure Atman, Om, Om, Om.”
Sin is expiated through self-punishment such as fasting, Japa, penance, meditation and
repentance with a contrite heart. Even a wicked man can have communion with God throughrepentance, prayer and meditation.
51KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book The confession of evil deeds is the beginning of good deeds. Be not ashamed to confess that
you have been in the wrong. If you confess your evil actions, you will then possess more sense than
you had before to see your error. If you confess your sins, you begin your journey towardsemancipation. He who is sorry for having done evil actions mends himself and improves quickly.
Repentance is a divine streamlet for sinners to wash off their sins. Repent with a contrite
heart. God will forgive you.
If you commit a wrong action on a certain occasion, you should not do so again. There
should be no wrong over wrong. You may claim forgiveness if you are resolute to do the evil actionno more.
Once a woman was charged for adultery. The Pharisees wanted Jesus to pronounce the
Mosaic verdict of stoning her to death. Lord Jesus quietly said, “Let him that is without sin amongyou cast the first stone at her.” This powerful utterance of the Lord at once turned the gaze of eachone present within himself. Who could be without sin? Introspection revealed their own defects.One by one the people hung their heads down and left the place.
“Where are they?” Jesus asked the woman after some time. “Did no man condemn thee?”
“No, my Lord,” she answered.“Neither do I condemn thee. Go thy way and sin no more,” said the Lord, summing up in
this beautiful incident the very essence of his divine message.
Contrition, a change of heart, is the only condition for God’s forgiveness of human sins.
Confess your sins. Repent for them. Turn away from them. Do not repeat them. Pray. Do Japa.
Meditate. Practise Pranayama. Perform expiatory acts. All your sins will then be washed away. Youwill shine with lustre and brilliance.
There is no such thing as eternal damnation or eternal hell-fire for sinners. It cannot be. It is
a theory that has long since been exploded. Eternal damnation is an ungodly doctrine. It has been aterror and a nightmare for ages. To make people desist from doing wicked actions, a terrifyingdescription of hell was given.
God has not created man to become everlasting fuel to feed the flames of hell. This is
certainly not the purpose of creation. If God be such, no one will pay homage to Him. Who then canbe saved? How many spotless people are there in this world? Who is of such untainted character asto receive a direct passport to heaven?
Everybody has his secret sins. Very few are born saints. No person can be found on earth
who shines with all the excellent qualities. No one is wise at all times and no one is a fool always.The sinner of today is the saint of tomorrow. Hate the sin but not the sinner.
52THE SAINT OF TOMORROWThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book A rogue is not an eternal rogue. A prostitute is not an eternal prostitute. Leave these people
in the company of saints: they will be newly moulded and transmuted into saints with virtuous
qualities. The transformation of Ratnakar into Valmiki is an epic example of this truth.
It is never too late to mend. There is great hope even for a cut-throat if he makes a strong
determination and takes up spiritual practices. A good, resolute start in virtuous life will give youpeace and happiness. Do it now. Leave off evil ways. Follow the path of goodness. Be pure in life.You will then attain God-realisation.
Steadily resist the promptings of your lower nature. Gradually it will lose its power over
you. You will gain strength. The spirit may pull in one direction and the flesh in another. Be firmand courageous. Yield not to the flesh. Be strong. Be positive always. Feel and think: “I can doeverything if I will. There is nothing that I cannot do.” Never give up the hope of realising God.
Watch every action. Allow not any impure action to stain your body. When anything pricks
your conscience, abandon it. Fight against the tempting power of self-gratification andself-aggrandisement. Overcome anger by love, falsehood by truth, lust by purity, greed bygenerosity and pride by humility.
Lose the sense of “I”-ness and “mine”-ness. Control the mind. Repeat the Name of the Lord.
Purify every part of yourself.
The service of others brings on virtue; harming others is sin. Therefore, serve others. Purify
your heart by means of selfless and humble service of the poor and the afflicted and make it a fitabode for God to dwell.
Every day is a fresh beginning. Forget your past mistakes and failures. Enter a new life of
victory. March on and on. Exert. Purify. Approach the saints. Abandon all fear, anxiety and worry.Rest in your divine centre. Sing Om. Meditate on Om. Realise the Self.
16
THE PLAY OF THE GUNAS
Purity, passion and inertia—these three qualities, O Mighty-armed, born of Prakriti,
bind fast in the body the embodied, the indestructible.
(XIV-5)
A clear understanding of the three Gunas and their operations is very necessary for a Karma
Yogi. He who has a knowledge of the three Gunas can do his work in a better and more efficientmanner.
53KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Guna means “cord”. The Gunas bind the soul with a triple bond. These Gunas are the actual
substances or ingredients of which Prakriti is constituted. They make up the whole world evolved
out of Prakriti. They are not conjoined in equal quantities but in varying proportions, one or theother being in excess.
The three Gunas are never separate. They support one another. They intermingle with one
another. They are intimately related, as the flame, the oil and the wick of the lamp. They form thevery substance of Prakriti. All objects are composed of the three Gunas. The Gunas act on oneanother. Then there is evolution or manifestation. Destruction is only non-manifestation.
Sattwa is equilibrium. When it prevails there is peace or tranquillity. Rajas is activity which
is expressed as attraction and repulsion, likes and dislikes, love and hatred. Tamas is that bindingforce with a tendency to lethargy, sloth and foolish actions. It causes delusion ornon-discrimination.
During the cosmic dissolution these three Gunas exist in a state of equilibrium. During the
process of projection, a vibration arises and these three qualities manifest in the physical universe.These three qualities bring bondage to the individual soul. Though Sattwa is a desirable quality, yetit also binds man. It is a golden fetter. Rajas is the source of attachment and thirst for life. It causesattachment to action. Tamas binds man to heedlessness, laziness and sleep.
The three qualities are inseparable. No one is absolutely Rajasic or Sattwic or Tamasic.
Sometimes Sattwa prevails in a man. He is calm and serene. He sits quietly and entertains sublime,soul-elevating thoughts. He studies religious scriptures. He talks on divine topics. When Sattwaprevails, the other two qualities are overpowered for the time being. At other times, Rajas prevails.The man does actions. He moves about. He plans, schemes and speculates. He craves for power,wealth and activity. When Rajas prevails, Sattwa and Tamas are overpowered for the time being.Sometimes Tamas prevails. Then man becomes slothful. He feels lazy, indolent and lethargic. He isdull. He feels sleepy. When Tamas prevails, then Sattwa and Rajas are overpowered for the timebeing.
In some people Sattwa is predominant, in others Rajas is predominant, while in the third
group Tamas rules the person. When the wisdom-light streameth forth from all the gates of thebody, then it may be known that Sattwa is increasing. Greed, outgoing of energy, the undertaking ofactions, restlessness and desire—these are born of the increase of Rajas. Darkness, stagnation,heedlessness and delusion—these qualities are born of the increase of inertia.
Intense Rajas takes a Sattwic turn sometimes. A man who is immersed very deeply in Rajas
may take to the path of renunciation. He will, as is the law, be fed up with activities. It is impossibleto rise or jump to Sattwa all of a sudden when one is in the Tamasic state. One should convert Tamasinto intense activity first. Just as the wheel of an engine appears to remain stationary when itrevolves rapidly, so also a Sattwic man appears to be calm through his self-restraint or self-control.A Sattwic man is the most active. He can turn out tremendous work within a short time. He has fullconcentration.
54THE PLAY OF THE GUNASThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Prakriti or Nature only does all actions. It is the Gunas that operate. Owing to ignorance the
body is mistaken for the Self. The egoism of man asserts itself at every moment and at every step.
Just as the motion of the clouds is falsely attributed to the sun, so also the movements of the bodyand the senses are falsely attributed to the Self. The Self is always silent and the witness of allactions.
The mind and the five organs of knowledge—the ear, skin, eye, tongue and nose—are
formed out of the Sattwic portion of the rudiments of matter. The Pranas and the five organs ofaction—the tongue, hands, feet, genitals and anus—are formed out of the Rajasic portion of therudiments of matter. This physical body is formed out of the Tamasic portion of the rudiments ofmatter.
The Atman is beyond the three Gunas. It is the witness of the three Gunas. One should
increase one’s Sattwa Guna by developing virtuous qualities, by doing charity, by practisingausterities, by taking Sattwic food and by practising Japa and meditation. He should control thesenses and study religious books. Then he should go beyond Sattwa Guna also by identifyinghimself with the Atman and practising reflection and contemplation.
When the dweller in the body has crossed these three qualities whence all bodies have been
produced, he is liberated from birth, death, old age, disease and sorrow. He drinks the nectar ofimmortality.
17
THE TECHNIQUE OF KARMA YOGA
Endowed with wisdom, one casts off in this life both good deeds and evil deeds;
therefore, devote thyself to Yoga; Yoga is skill in action.
(II-50)
The wise, possessed of knowledge, having abandoned the fruit of their actions, and
freed from the fetters of birth, go to the place which is beyond all evil .
(II-51)
In this there is no loss of effort nor is there any harm. Even a little of this knowledge
protects one from great fear.
(II-40)
Merit and demerit do not affect that Karma Yogi who has evenness or equanimity of mind,
for he exults not over the good fruit of the one nor worries over the evil fruit of the other. He hasequanimity of mind in success and failure. His mind is resting in God all the while. Works which are
55KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book of a binding nature lose that nature when performed with a balanced mind. The Karma Yogi has no
attachment to the sensual objects. He has purified his mind by means of constant selfless service.He has given up all idea of agency. He treats the body as an instrument of God given to Him for thefulfilment of His purpose. He attributes all activities to the divine actor within. He who isestablished in the Yoga of equanimity becomes an expert in the science of Karma Yoga.
You will have to eliminate even such subtle attachment as “may God be pleased”. Work
merely for God’s sake. Then even acts like eating, walking, talking, breathing, sleeping andanswering the calls of nature become Yogic activities. Work will then become worship. This is thegreat secret. You will have to spiritualise all your actions. You will have to transmute them intoYoga through practice. Mere theorising will not do. Understand the secrets of Karma Yoga andwork unselfishly. Become a true Karma Yogi and enjoy the infinite bliss of the Atman.
The Karma Yogi who possesses evenness of mind casts off the fruit of works. He escapes
from good and bad births. Clinging to fruit only is the cause of rebirth. When all actions areperformed for God’s sake in fulfilment of His purpose, without desire for fruit, the Karma Yogi getsillumination. He shakes off the bondage of birth. He attains knowledge of Brahman and, throughBrahma-Jnana, liberation or Moksha.
Actions which are of a binding nature lose that nature when you perform them with
equanimity through the help of pure reason, which has lost all attachment to sensual objects andwhich is resting in the Self. You will have to cultivate and develop this pure reason and equanimityof mind. God has given this marvellous machine of the human body to man for service of humanity,and thereby, for the attainment of an immortal life. If man uses this body for the satisfaction of pettydesires and petty, selfish ends, he becomes an object of pity and condemnation. He is caught up inthe wheel of births and deaths.
Rest the mind in the Self when you perform any action. He who has developed a pure,
poised reason and who rests in the Self is aware that all actions are performed by the divine actorwithin. He is perfectly conscious that God really moves and operates this body-machine. This Yogiof equanimity understands completely the principles that govern all bodily actions. He performsactions for the sake of God in fulfilment of His purpose, without desire for fruit. He eventuallyattains the immortal abode of everlasting peace and bliss.
The path of Karma Yoga, which eventually leads to the attainment of the infinite bliss of the
Self, cannot be futile. If a religious ceremony is left incomplete, it is a wastage as the performercannot realise its fruit; but this is not so in the case of Karma Yoga, because every action bringsabout an immediate purification of the heart.
You do not lose anything in Karma Yoga. Even if you do a little service of the country, of
society, of the poor and destitute, it has its own advantages and benefits. It purifies your heart andprepares the inner, fourfold mind for the reception of knowledge of Atman. The impressions ofthese good actions are indelibly imbedded in your subconscious mind. The force of suchimpressions will again propel you to do some good actions. Sympathy, love and the spirit ofpatriotism and service will be gradually developed. Nothing is lost when the candle burns.
56THE TECHNIQUE OF KARMA YOGAThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book In agriculture you may manure and plough the field. Your efforts may be rendered futile if
there is no rain during the year. This is not the case with selfless service. There is no uncertainty
here regarding the results of any effort. Further, there is not the least chance of getting any harm bypractising this Karma Yoga. If the doctor is a little injudicious, and administers medicine inover-doses, some harm will result. This is not so with Karma Yoga. Even a little service, a littlepractice of Nishkama Karma Yoga in any form, will save you from the great fear of worldlyexistence with its pains and sorrows, of birth and death with its concomitant evils.
18
ACTION IS THY DUTY
Thy right is to work only, but never with its fruit. Let not the fruit of action be thy
motive, nor let thy attachment be to inaction.
(II-47)
Man generally plans to get the fruit of his actions before he commences any kind of work.
The mind is so framed that it cannot think of any kind of work without remuneration or reward. Thisis due to Rajas.
The quality of Rajas creates selfishness and attachment. A selfish man has no large heart.
He has no ideal. He is petty-minded. His mind is full of greed. He always calculates. He cannot doany service in a magnanimous manner. He will say, “I will get so much money. I must therefore putforth so much work only.” He will weigh the work and money in a balance. He cannot do a littlemore work. He will be ever looking at the clock to stop the work. He is mercenary. He is hired formoney. He is actuated by the hope of reward. He is greedy. Selfless service is unknown to him. Hehas no idea of God. He has no glimpse of the Truth. He cannot even imagine an expanded, selflesslife. He has a narrow, circumscribed circle or groove. He dwells within this small groove. His loveextends to his own body and to his wife and children only. That is all. Generosity is unknown tohim.
Human nature is always like this. The mind is so framed that it cannot work without the
expectation of fruit or anticipation of rewards for actions. If you smile when you meet your friend,you do expect a smile from him in return. If you give a cup of water to someone, you do expectsomething in return from him. If you greet your friend in Mount Road, you do expect him to returnyour greeting. This is the inborn nature of a worldly-minded man.
When discrimination dawns, when the mind is filled with more purity, this nature changes
slowly. The spirit of selflessness begins to grow slowly. You have to train the mind to workdisinterestedly. You have to tame the mind very cautiously. You have to discipline it with patienceand perseverance. Worldly-minded people cannot understand the spirit of selfless service.
57KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book In the beginning, all your actions may be selfish. But if you work hard in the field of Karma
Yoga for two years, five actions may be unselfish and ninety-five selfish. Scrutinise your motives,
purify them and struggle hard. After some years of hard, incessant struggle, fifty actions willbecome unselfish. A good time will come when all your actions, hundred per cent, will be purelyunselfish. You will become a perfect Karma Yogi like Raja Janaka. The time will not be very far ifyou keep the ideal before you daily and struggle hard to reach it, and if you are sincere and earnestin your purpose.
Do you expect anything from your small son if you do him some service? In a similar
manner you have to work for others also without expecting anything. You have to expand yourheart and think that this whole world is your own Self. In the beginning it may give you a little painbecause you have never worked up to this time in this line of selfless and disinterested service.When you have tasted a bit of the bliss of Karma Yoga, you can never leave it. The force of KarmaYoga will induce you to work more and more, with greater zeal and enthusiasm. You will begin tofeel that this whole world is a manifestation of God. You will gain immense inner strength andpurity of heart. Your heart will be filled with sympathy, mercy and pure love. Your spirit ofself-sacrifice will grow ad infinitum. Selfishness of all sorts will be annihilated. Those who work in
the public field for the welfare of the country and for suffering humanity can realise the truth of thisstatement.
Ignorant people say that one cannot work without any motive. It is a great pity that they have
not understood the essence and truth of Karma Yoga. Their minds are saturated with all sorts offantastic desires and selfishness and, as such, their minds are very impure and clouded. They cannotgrasp the underlying truth of Karma Yoga. They judge others from their own standpoint.Selflessness is a thing unknown to them. Their minds and brains have been rendered callous and sothey cannot vibrate properly to understand what a motiveless action is. Passionate householderscannot dream of doing any work without expecting some gain for themselves and their family.
When the thought of doing good becomes part and parcel of a man’s very being, then he will
not entertain the least motive. He will take immense delight in serving others, in doing good toothers. There is a peculiar joy and bliss in the practice of vigorous Karma Yoga. The Karma Yogigets inner spiritual strength and power by performing selfless and motiveless actions.
Selfless work elevates and brings freedom. Selfish work retards spiritual progress and
fastens one more chain to your feet. If you find it difficult to work without any motive, have onestrong motive for freedom when you work. This will not bind you. This will destroy all the otherlower selfish motives and will eventually die by itself, just as the stick used in burning a dead bodyburns the dead body and is itself consumed in the end. The joy of a developed Karma Yogi is reallyunbounded. Words cannot adequately describe his exalted state and inward happiness.
Look at the stupendous and magnanimous work turned out by Lord Buddha, Sri Sankara
and other Karma Yogis of yore. Their names are handed down from posterity to posterity. Theirnames are still remembered. The whole world worships them with reverence. Can you attribute aniota of selfish motive to their actions? They lived for rendering service to others. They practisedabsolute self-abnegation.
58ACTION IS THY DUTYThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book God dispenses the fruit of actions according to the motive. If the motive is pure, you will get
Divine Grace and purity of mind. If the motive is impure, if you expect fruit for your actions, you
will have to return to this world to reap those fruit. You will have to take birth again. Again you willdo virtuous and vicious actions through the force of attraction and repulsion. You will be entrappedin the never-ending wheel of births and deaths.
But you should not remain in a state of inertia also, thinking that you will not get the fruit of
your work if you work selflessly. You must not say now, “What is the use of my work now? I cannotget any fruit. I will remain inactive.” This is also undesirable. You will become dull and Tamasic.There will be mental inactivity.
A Nishkama Karma Yogi says, “Do all actions without the expectation of fruit. This will
produce purity of the mind and heart. Then one will get knowledge of the Self. One will getliberation or eternal bliss and immortality.” This is his doctrine. This is a very great reward for youractions. You cannot imagine the exalted condition of a man of pure mind. He has unbounded peace,strength and joy. He is very near God. He is dear to God. He will soon receive the Divine Light.
Work without any kind of motive and feel its effects, namely, purity and inner strength.
Become a Nishkama Karma Yogi. Dedicate all your actions to God. What an expanded heart youwill now have! Indescribable! Practise, feel and enjoy this wonderful state of everlasting peace andperennial bliss.
19
EVENNESS OF MIND IS YOGA
Perform action, O Dhananjaya, being steadfast in Yoga, abandoning attachment and
balanced in success and failure! Evenness of mind is called Yoga.
(II-48)
Worldly people are generally elated by success and depressed by failure. Elation and
depression are attributes of the mind. If you want to become a real Karma Yogi in the right sense ofthe term, you will have to keep a balanced mind at all times, in all conditions, under allcircumstances. This is no doubt very difficult, but you will have to discipline the mind throughconstant practice. You will have to do it anyhow. Then only will you have peace of mind and real,lasting happiness. He who keeps a balanced mind is a Jnani. Karma Yoga prepares the mind for theattainment of Jnana. That is the beauty of Karma Yoga. That is the secret and essence of KarmaYoga.
Many people get attached to the work. They like some kind of work and take interest in it.
They dislike some other kind of work. They are unwilling to leave the work they like if conditionsrequire it. They take undue responsibility on their shoulders and pine and labour under cares,
59KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book worries and anxieties. This is not Yoga at all because there is attachment to the work owing to the
quality of Rajas.
There must not be the least attachment to any kind of work. You must be ready to
discontinue any work at any time. There may be a divine call upon you for certain work. You willhave to take it up at once without any grumbling, whatever may be the nature of the work, whetheryou are willing or not. If there is a divine call, you may start a world-wide movement. You will haveto stop the undertaking also, if conditions and circumstances demand that you do so. This is Yoga.You must be prepared to stop it at any time if God wills. You should not care whether there issuccess or failure. Simply obey the divine call and act like a soldier on the battlefield. There willthen be no attachment to the work. There is great joy in such Karma Yoga because there is nopersonal element present here.
Keep the reason rooted in the Self. Have a poised mind amidst the changes of the world.
Work for the fulfilment of purposes divine. Do not expect any fruit. Do everything as an offering tothe Lord, as worship of the Lord. Work for the welfare of the world in unison with the Divine Will.Allow the divine energy to work unhampered through your instruments. The moment your egoismenters, there will be an immediate impediment to the free flow of the divine energy. Make yoursenses perfect instruments for His Lila. Keep the body-flute hollow by emptying yourself of youregoism. Then the Flute-bearer of Brindavan will play freely through your body-flute. He will workthrough your instruments. Then you will feel the lightness of the work. You will feel that Godworks through you. You will be freed of all your responsibilities. You will be as free as a bird. Youwill feel that you are quite a changed being. Your egoism will try to re-enter. So be careful. Be onthe alert.
By gradual practice and purification of the mind, you will become an expert in Karma Yoga.
All your actions will be done perfectly and selflessly. All your actions will then culminate in Jnanaor spiritual wisdom. This is the goal of Karma Yoga. This is the Yoga of equanimity.
20
LIKE WATER ON THE LOTUS LEAF
Therefore, do thou always, without attachment, perform action which should be done;
for, by performing action without attachment, man reaches the Supreme.
(III-19)
Attachment to objects is universal. No one is free from attachment of one kind or the other.
The Sanskrit word for attachment is “Aasakti”. The term “Raga” also is used sometimes.
Attachment is the first child of Maya. Attachment is the most powerful weapon of Maya for
binding the Jivas to the Samsaric wheel of birth and death. You will never come back into this worldif you have no attachment for anything. This whole Lila of the Lord is kept up by the force of
60EVENNESS OF MIND IS YOGAThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book attachment. A sober man just tastes a small peg of champagne when he is in evil company and
becomes an inveterate drunkard through attachment to liquor. A non-smoker just takes a whiff ofGoldflake and becomes a terrible smoker in a short time through attachment.
The first attachment commences with this physical body. Then all the other attachments
crop up. Now the relationship of father, mother, sister, brother and wife comes in. One may getattached to a place, person or object. Attachment is a kind of strong glue that affixes the mind to theobject. There is in the mind a gummy substance which is like a mixture of castor oil, glue, gumarabic, mucilage of tragacanth, gluten paste, honey, glycerine, jack-fruit juice and all the othergummy substances of this world. This mind is glued, as it were, to the objects with this mixture.Therefore, the attachment is very strong.
Why does the mind get attached to objects or persons? Because it finds pleasure in objects
or persons. Wherever there is pleasure, there is attachment. The mind is attached to wife, son, houseor friend because it finds pleasure in these objects.
Man always thirsts for the possession of objects, wife and wealth. This possession of objects
generates selfishness. Selfishness causes greater attachment. Wherever there is attachment, thereyou will find the feeling of “I”-ness and “mine”-ness. The full misery now starts. The whole Mayaiccircle begins to revolve. The man becomes a slave now. Strong iron chains are fastened to hishands, knees and legs. He entangles himself like the spider or the silkworm. This is his ownself-created trouble through attachment.
Attachment is the root-cause of all human ills and sufferings. It is the product of ignorance.
It is a modification of nescience or ignorance. The husband weeps at the death of his wife becausehe is attached to the physical body of his wife. The wife also weeps at the time of her husband’sdeath, not because of pure love for him, but simply because now she will not get any sexual pleasureand other comforts which she had enjoyed when he was alive. Wherever there is strong attachment,there one will find infatuation and fear. Infatuation is a delusion. Infatuation and fear are theold-standing associates of attachment. The cause of fear is attachment to this body and property.Attachment and fear are inseparable. They are like fire and heat.
Attachment takes on various forms. One should always be on the alert to detect its subtle
workings. It does not spare even Sannyasins who have practically renounced everything. Theyslowly get attached to their Ashrams and disciples. This attachment is much stronger than theattachment of worldly persons. This is more difficult to eradicate.
Thousands of widows from Bengal and Madras are now staying at Varanasi with the sole
idea that they will get liberation if they die there. But their minds are ever fixed on theirgranddaughters and grandsons. They are attached to the huge heaps of cow-dung cakes which theyhave been accumulating in the backyards of their houses for kindling fire.
The mind tries its utmost to get attached to some form or the other. It can never remain
without clinging to one form or another. It leaves one form and immediately clings to another. Thisis its nature. This is due to the quality of Rajas. If Rajas is eradicated all attachments will die bythemselves. People are attached to paltry things, even to note-books, walking sticks, pictures and
61KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book handkerchiefs. The friendship of several years comes to its termination if Mr Kishen Prasad, who is
a friend of Mr Ram Narayan, loses a small book which he had borrowed from the latter. A fightensues. There is a flow of hot words and abuses. They do not talk to and see each other from thatmoment.
Women fight over little things. All this results from attachment. Even Sannyasins get
attached to their water-pots, sticks and small tumblers. Even at the time of death they entertainthoughts of petty articles. The mind is so framed that it sticks to the old ruts and grooves. It demandsdrastic and rigorous discipline and real Sadhana to get rid of all sorts of attachment. One has tostruggle hard and practise keen enquiry. The mind needs constant training, if someone says, “Thathouse is on fire,” or “the horse is dead” you are not a bit affected. Why? Because there is neitherattachment nor identification here. But if the person says, “The house of Mr Ram Narayan is onfire,” or “the horse of Mr Ganga Shankar is dead,” at once attachment plays its role if the aboveindividuals are present and hear the statements. Why? Because they have identification with thehouse and horse. It is verily attachment that brings sorrow.
In South India a Nattukkottai Chetty’s wife lost her little son. The boy accidentally rolled
into a tank. The mother had very intense attachment for the boy. At once she jumped into the tankand got drowned. The husband also was very much attached to both his wife and son. He tootherefore drowned himself immediately. Instances like these occur daily. Several people becomevery nervous and get a shock also when they lose their wife or son. They are unable to talk or walk.Such is the havoc wrought by attachment.
It is this very attachment that brings us again and again to this world. The seeds of
attachment are ingrained in the subconscious mind. We have to obliterate or fry all these seeds in
totothrough right thinking, enquiry and knowledge of the Atman. We have to cut asunder all these
illusory attachments with the sword of dispassion or non-attachment.
Non-attachment is dispassion or indifference to sensual enjoyments. It is a purely mental
state. The binding link is really in the mind. “I”-ness and “mine”-ness are the two poisonous fangsof the mind-serpent. Extract these two fangs and the serpent-mind will be tamed. There can be nobondage then. It is the mind that creates the ideas of “I”-ness and “mine”-ness. It is the mind thatlinks the Jiva with the body and creates body-idea and the man thinks that he is the body. It is themind that causes attachment to wife, son and property. If the binding link in the mind is destroyed,you can remain wherever you like. You can roam about peacefully in any part of the world,unattached like water on the lotus leaf. Nothing can then bind you. The whole mischief is wroughtby the mind. A man may rule a vast dominion and yet he can be unattached. Queen Chudalai andRaja Janaka had not the least attachment to their wealth and kingdoms, Janaka said, “Even if thewhole of Mithila is burnt, nothing of mine will be burnt”. Look at the exalted mental state ofJanaka! He was resting in his own essential divine nature. He had not a bit of attachment. Themental state of Chudalai also was the same as that of Janaka.
Work cannot bring misery but it is the attachment to it and identification with work that
brings in all sorts of worries, troubles and unhappiness. Understand the secret of Karma Yoga andwork without attachment and identification. You will soon attain God-consciousness. This isJnana. This is the fire of wisdom which burns all the fruit of actions.
62LIKE WATER ON THE LOTUS LEAFThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Never say, “My body, my son, my wife, my house.” Attachment is the root-cause of all the
miseries and troubles in this world. Discipline the mind carefully. The old habits will creep in.
Destroy them to the very root. Lead a life of perfect non-attachment. This is the master-key to openthe realms of Brahmic bliss. But work incessantly without attachment, without any identification.Then alone can you have real happiness. You will yourself feel that you are a different being now.
Karma Yoga elevates a man to sublime, magnanimous heights. One should work patiently.
No meditation and Samadhi are possible without a preliminary training in Karma Yoga. To workwithout attachment is doubtless a difficult task. It is an uphill work. But it becomes easy andpleasant for a man of patience and determination. You will have to do it at any cost if you want thefinal beatitude and immortality. Everybody will do it, though not now, maybe after severalhundreds of births. But the question is: why not now? Cut short the cycle and enjoy supreme blissright now in this very second, in this very birth. This is wisdom.
You will have to train the mind daily in all dealings and actions. Do not get attached to your
wife, children and property. The world is like a public inn. People are united for some time andseparated after some time. Turn the mind towards God or the Atman and do daily Japa, meditationand study of holy scriptures. Study books on Vedanta and Bhartrihari’s Vairagya Shatakam.
Develop intense internal dispassion by understanding the illusory nature of this world. Alwaysremember the pains of this worldly existence. Place before the mind the glorious life in the Atmanand the supreme bliss of spiritual life. Remember the saints, Yogins and Jnanis like Sri Sankara,Mansoor, Shams Tabriez and Jnanadev and their sublime teachings. Slowly the mind will beweaned from sensual objects. It can be gradually turned towards God-realisation. Have recourse tothe company of saints and devotees.
Learn to discriminate between the Real and the unreal. Try to develop dispassion as much as
you can. Have no intimate connection with anybody. Lead a life of non-attachment to this world.Live like the lotus leaf in water. Do not bother a bit when you lose petty things. Think always thatthe perishable objects of this world are worthless. Repeat mentally the formula, “All objects areperishable”. Do enquiry into the nature of the Atman. Meditate daily. That man who has noattachment in this world is the happiest man. He is God Himself. His joy is indescribable. He shouldbe adored.
63KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 21
MIND TO GOD, HANDS TO WORK
Therefore, at all times remember Me only and fight. With mind and intellect fixed in
Me, thou shalt doubtless come to Me alone.
(VIII-7)
Fix your mind at the Lotus Feet of the Lord. Give the hands to work. Even when you work,
work like the typist who types and talks to you, or like the lady who knits and talks at the same time.
Let your mind be ever attached to the Lotus Feet of the Lord while your hands are at work. The mindof the girl who has the water-pot on her head is on the pot even though she talks and jests with hercomrades while walking along the road. Through gradual practice you will be able to do two thingsat the same time. The manual work will become automatic, mechanical or instinctive. You willhave two minds. A portion of your mind will be at work while another portion will be engaged inJapa and meditation on the Lord. Therefore, always repeat the Name of the Lord while at work also.
Ashtavadhanis do eight things at a time. They play cards, move the man in Chaturanga play,
dictate some passages to a third man, talk to a fourth in order and continuation, and so on. This is aquestion of training of the mind. You also can train the mind to work with the hands and rememberGod at the same time. This is Karma Yoga and Bhakti Yoga combined.
Though the cow grazes in the pasture, being separated from the calf, her mind is always
fixed on the calf only. Similarly, you should fix the mind on God when you do Japa, and give yourhands to the work, which is worship of God only. Renounce all attachment. Be balanced in successand failure, in gain and loss, in victory and defeat, in pleasure and pain. Train and discipline yourmind cautiously. This is your master-key to open the doors of the realms of bliss. This is the secretof Karma Yoga. This is the secret of success in Yoga.
Here is another interesting illustration. The mind of a nurse is always on her own child
though she fondles and caresses the child of her master for the time being. The mind of an immoralwoman is always on her paramour though she is engaged in her household duties. Even so, fix themind at the Lotus Feet of the Lord and give the hands to worldly activities. You can realise Godeven while remaining in the world if you adopt this method. You need not retire to the Himalayancaves or forests.
64MIND TO GOD, HANDS TO WORKThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 22
THE DESCENT OF GOD
Though I am unborn, of imperishable nature, and though I am the Lord of all beings,
yet, ruling over My own nature, I am born by My own Maya.
Whenever there is decay of righteousness, O Bharata, and rise of unrighteousness,
then I manifest Myself!
For the protection of the good, for the destruction of the wicked, and for the
establishment of righteousness, I am born in every age.
(IV-6, 7 & 8)
The Bhakta desires to see his Deity in human form. This is the cause of an Avatara, an
Incarnation. This is the reason why the formless Brahman is forced to assume a human form to
please His devotees. The cause of the descent of an Avatara is the shedding of tears by the sinceredevotees.
There is descent of God for the ascent of man. Whenever there is a catastrophe in the world,
whenever there is unrighteousness, God comes down to the earth-plane to establish Dharma. Hetakes on a human form when He comes down to the physical plane. He is then called an Avatara.
Avataras are of various kinds. There is the Purna Avatara, Amsa Avatara, Avesh Avatara
and Lila Avatara of the Virat Purusha for the preservation of the universe. Lord Krishna was aPurna Avatara with sixteen rays. Lord Rama was an Avatara with fourteen rays. Sri Sankara was anAmsa Avatara.
God Almighty does send now and then His messengers to the world to disseminate devotion
far and wide and to stir the people onto the spiritual path. Lord Gauranga, Kabir, Ramdas andGoswami Tulsidas were all His sweet, sincere messengers. How kind, affectionate and merciful isGod! O sceptics, materialists and atheists! when will you open your eyes and ears? Wake up! Donot delay even a second. The God of Death is opening his jaws to devour you. Run to the Lord withopen arms, with all feeling. Take refuge in Him and say, “O Lord, have mercy!”
Some people say, “How can we take Krishna as the Lord or Bhagavan? He took birth and
died. He was only a man.” This is a false statement. This is the utterance of an ignorant child. LordKrishna did not take birth like human beings and then die like them. He made His appearance anddisappeared. He exists still. There are His Nitya Lilas in Go-Loka or the Celestial Brindavan. Thebody of Avataras is made of Suddha Sattwa. Avataras have divine bodies. Their bodies are notmade up of human flesh.
Lord Krishna had only manifested Himself for a time to establish world solidarity. He then
disappeared. He was Lord Hari Himself. There is no doubt of this. He had a body of consciousness.
65KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book His body was not made of flesh. Have full trust in Him. He will deliver you from the rounds of
births and deaths. Repeat His Divine Name, “Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya” and sing HisKirtan, “Sri Krishna Govinda Hare Murare, He Natha Narayana Vasudeva”.
Some ignorant persons object: “How can the unborn God assume a human form? How can
the ruler of the universe be limited to a perishable body? How can the Lord who stands as thewitness assume a finite body?” These are all vain, worthless, illogical questions. The doctrine ofAvatara-hood is perfectly rational, logical and tenable.
God is the inner witness, the inner Self of all beings. He is not an absentee landlord of this
world. He is not just a supra-cosmic Deity. He pervades and permeates all the atoms and the wholeuniverse. He is the Lord of the breath, the mind and all the organs. In Him we live, move and haveour very being.
Just as a tailor who makes coats for others can make a coat for himself also, in a similar
manner God, who has created bodies for others can create a body for Himself as well. There is nodifficulty. He is omnipotent and omniscient. As He has control over Maya, He is fully conscious ofHis divine nature though He assumes a form. At the same time He is infinite and unconditioned.
Sometimes the king visits the jail and enters the cell of a prisoner to see how matters are
getting on in the prison. He does this for the good of the prisoners only. He is quite independent andyet, out of his own free will, he himself enters the cell. Even so, an Avatara puts on a fleshy body outof His own free will for the ascent of man. He is quite independent and has absolute control overMaya, like the king. The Jiva, on the other hand, is a slave of ignorance as long as he has noSelf-realisation.
A simple Jivanmukta is like a star that glitters at night. He throws a little light only.
Somehow or other he has crossed to the other shore through some austerity and Sadhana. He cannotelevate a large number of people. Just as the waters of a small spring in the field can quench thethirst of a few pilgrims only, so also this Kevala Jnani can bring peace to a few persons only. But theAvatara is a mighty person. He is like the large Mansarovar lake. He removes the veil of ignoranceof thousands of men and women and takes them to the land of eternal rest, bliss and sunshine.
There are some premonitory signs that indicate the advent of an Avatara. The ground is well
prepared for His descent. People take interest in Sankirtan and pious people disseminate SankirtanBhakti far and wide. Other great souls are born beforehand and these train people in selfless serviceand right conduct.
There is a grand possibility of the descent of God in human form as an Avatara. This has
occurred several times in the past and will continue to occur in the future as well. In the divinescheme of things, Avataras are indispensably required for the uplift of humanity.
In this Kali Yuga, the Kalki Avatara is expected. May that Avatara bring supreme joy,
peace, bliss and happiness to the whole world! Glory, glory unto Avataras!
66THE DESCENT OF GODThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 23
THE RATIONALE OF SAGUNA WORSHIP
Whatsoever form any devotee desires to worship with faith, that same faith of his I
make firm and unflinching .
(VII-21)
Man does not get full satisfaction from sensual pleasures. He always feels that he is in want
of something. He is restless and discontented. Then he longs to come into conscious communion
with the Lord of the universe and to attain immortality and everlasting peace. This ultimate cravingof man finds its satisfaction in worship. The individual soul desires to unite himself with his father,the Supreme Soul. This is done through worship. Love and devotion naturally arise in the heart ofman when he hears the glory and greatness of the Lord. An object of worship is therefore necessaryfor man to pour forth his love and devotion. Worship helps spiritual evolution and eventually bringsthe devotee face to face with God. As the Absolute cannot be comprehended by the limited andfinite mind, the concept of the impersonal God in His lower, limited form came into existence. TheNirguna Brahman assumed forms for the pious worship of the devotees.
Worship is the expression of the love and devotion of the devotee for the Lord, of his
extreme reverence for Him, of his keen longing to be in conscious communion, of eager aspirationto be always at His Feet, of intense craving to be united with Him. The devotee feels the pangs of hisseparation from the Lord. He sheds profuse tears and sings of His glories, splendour and greatness.Worship may take the form of prayer, of praises, of meditation and of Kirtan.
Worship differs according to the growth and evolution of the individual. There is
Nature-worship. The Parsis worship the element of fire. Hindus worship the Ganges, the cows, theAsvattha tree and the Tulasi plant. In the Vedas there are hymns to Indra, Varuna, Agni and Vayu.
This is Nature-worship.
There is also hero-worship. Great heroes like Shivaji and Napoleon are worshipped even
now. In hero-worship the individual imbibes the virtues of the person whom he worships. Birthdaycelebrations of great persons and their anniversary celebrations are forms of worship.
Then there is the worship of relics. Hairs and bones of departed souls are also worshipped.
We also have the Pitri-worship or worship of the forefathers.
There is the worship of Gurus, of Rishis, of Deities. As man evolves, he passes from one
stage of worship to another. The lower stages drop away by themselves. A man of a higher stageshould not condemn his brother who is in a lower stage. One should not forget the underlying,indwelling, interpenetrating Essence or Intelligence when one does any kind of worship. Thefundamental object in worship is union with the Lord who pervades or permeates all names andforms. This has to be achieved by developing intense love.
67KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Whilst all things may be objects of worship, a choice has to be made of those objects which,
by reason of their effect on the mind, are more fitted for it. An image, a picture, or one of the useful
emblems, is likely to raise in the mind of the worshipper the thought of a Deity. The idol easilyinduces concentration of mind. Everybody has predilection for a symbol, emblem or image. Theidol, the sun, fire, water, the Ganges and the Shiva-Linga are all symbols of God which assistaspirants to attain one-pointedness of mind and purity of heart. These reflect personal inclinationsin the worshipper, due to his belief in the special efficacy of a particular object of worship for him.Psychologically, all this means that a particular mind finds that it works best in a desired directionby means of particular instruments or emblems or images.
The vast majority of people have either impure minds or weak minds. Therefore, the object
of worship must be pure for these people. Those objects that are capable of exciting lust and dislikeshould be avoided. But an advanced aspirant, who has a pure mind and who sees the DivinePresence everywhere and in everything, can worship any object.
In worship, an image or a picture representing some divine form is used as the object of
worship. The image is adored. An image or idol represents the form of the particular Deity that isinvoked in it. The Shiva-Linga represents Lord Shiva. It represents the secondless, formlessBrahman.
TheSrutis most emphatically declare: “Ekamevadvitiyam Brahma—The Brahman is one
without a second”. There is no duality here. The Linga is shining and attractive to the eye. It helpsconcentration. Ravana propitiated Shiva and obtained boons by worshipping the Linga.
The Saligram is an idol of Lord Vishnu. It is the symbol of Vishnu. There are images of
other Hindu gods and goddesses to suit the taste of particular devotees.
The images of Vishnu and His Avataras, and the images of Shakti and Shiva, are the popular
idols that are worshipped both in temples and in homes. The idols in the temples in places likeTirupati, Pandharpur, Palani and Kathirgama are powerful Deities. They are Deities that grantboons to the devotees, cure their ailments and give Darshan. Wonderful Lilas are associated withthese Deities. There is no polytheism in Hinduism. Shiva, Vishnu, Brahma and Shakti are differentaspects of the one Lord.
The devotee sometimes selects his family Deity for his worship. Sometimes, the Deity is
chosen for him by his Guru. Sometimes, he himself chooses that Deity which appeals to him most.This form is his tutelary Deity.
God reveals Himself to His devotees in a variety of ways. He assumes the very form which
the devotee has chosen for his worship. If you worship Him as Lord Hari with four hands, He willcome to you as Hari. If you adore Him as Shiva, He will appear before you as Shiva. If you worshipHim as Mother Durga or Kali, He will come to you as Durga or Kali. If you worship Him as LordRama, Lord Krishna or Lord Dattatreya, He will come to you as Rama, Krishna and Dattatreya. Ifyou worship Him as Christ or Allah, He will give you His vision as Christ or Allah.
68THE RATIONALE OF SAGUNA WORSHIPThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book You may worship Lord Shiva or Lord Hari, Lord Ganesha or Lord Subrahmanya or any of
the Avataras, like Lord Rama or Lord Krishna. You may worship Saraswathi or Lakshmi, Gayatri
or Kali, Durga or Chandi. All are aspects of the one Lord. Under whatever name and form it may be,it is the Lord who is adored. Worship goes to the indweller, the Lord in the form which is beingworshipped. It is sheer ignorance to think that one form is superior to another. All forms are one andthe same. Shiva, Vishnu, Gayatri, Rama, Krishna, Devi and Brahman are one. All worship goes tothe one basic Reality—the Supreme Brahman. The differences are only differences in name andform, on account of differences in the worshippers. There is no difference in the essential object ofworship.
Worship of Lord Jesus or Lord Mohammed or Sri Guru Nanak or Lord Buddha or Lord
Mahavira is really worship of Brahman only. These are all manifestations of His forms. It is onlyout of ignorance that different religionists and different sects fight and quarrel amongst themselves.Therefore, be tolerant and have a broad outlook on life because the basic essentials of all religionsand paths leading to God are the same.
24
THE FOUR TYPES OF DEVOTEES
Four kinds of virtuous men worship Me, O Arjuna—the distressed, the seeker of
knowledge, the seeker of wealth, and the wise, O lord of the Bharatas!
(VIII-16)
Bhaktas or devotees of God are of four types—the Arta, the Jijnasu, the Artarthi and the
Jnani.
The Arta is the distressed devotee who is suffering very much and who craves for the Grace
of God in order to get himself relieved of pain and sorrow.
The Jijnasu is the seeker after knowledge who feels that he is ignorant and wants the Grace
of God in order to have wisdom.
The Artarthi is the seeker of wealth who longs for earthly possessions, money and land in
order to enjoy a happy life. He propitiates God in order to get His Grace which will enable him toamass wealth.
The Jnani is the wise man, the sage, who is satisfied in the Self, who is contented in the Self,
who has no desires, who is freed from desires, who has all desires fulfilled, whose only desire is theSelf, and who considers his own Self as the all-inclusive God.
The distressed is he who is suffering from any chronic, incurable disease, whose life is in jeopardy
on account of an earthquake, a volcanic eruption or thunder, an attack by a dacoit, a tiger or an
69KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book enemy. Draupadi and Gajendra were examples of Arta Bhaktas. When Dushasana dragged
Draupadi before the court of the Kauravas and tried to disrobe her, Draupadi cried for Krishna inorder to protect her modesty. Gajendra called on Narayana when a crocodile was dragging him intothe water.
The Jijnasu is the enquirer. He is dissatisfied with the world. There is a void in his life. He
always feels that sensual pleasure is not the highest form of happiness and that there is pure eternalbliss unmixed with grief and pain, which is to be found within. Uddhava was a Jijnasu. He wasdissatisfied with the world and obtained wisdom from Sri Krishna. This is recorded in theBhagavata.
The seeker after wealth craves for money, wife, children, position, name and fame. Sugriva
and Dhruva were Artarthi Bhaktas. Sugriva wanted to drive away Vali and get his kingdom.Vibhishana wanted to put an end to Ravana and get Lanka. Dhruva wanted a kingdom where hisstep-mother would not trouble and ill-treat him.
The Jnani is a man of knowledge who has attained Self-illumination. Suka Maharishi was a
Jnani Bhakta. He was a Brahma-Jnani of the highest type. He realised that everything was his ownSelf. He taught the Srimad Bhagavata to Parikshit.
There is yet another type of Bhakta called Vaira Bhakta. This Bhakta is a negative type of
devotee. He does not have positive devotion to the Lord. He hates the Lord and thus remembersHim constantly. Hatred also requires a constant remembrance of the enemy. So, such an individualis also a kind of devotee only. He attains salvation through Vaira Bhakti. Kamsa, Sisupala andothers thought of Lord Krishna constantly on account of their deep hatred for Him. They thusattained salvation on being killed by Krishna.
The devotion of the distressed, of the seeker of knowledge, and of the selfish man is, after
all, secondary, as they have ulterior, selfish motives in view. But the devotion of the wise is pureand absolutely unselfish. It is Para Bhakti or primary devotion. The Para Bhakta has undivided lovefor the Lord. He has wholehearted devotion to the Lord. He is eternally united with Him. God isdearest to him and he is dearest to God.
Love for God should be unselfish. There should be no earthly motive behind the love of
God. Otherwise, it becomes only a modification of infatuation and delusion. The Arta, the Jijnasuand the Artarthi are all selfish Bhaktas. They cannot have the highest fruit of devotion. They aredeluded by earthliness. Only a Jnani is a true, selfless Bhakta, flooded with the majesty andgrandeur of emotionless peace. The highest kind of Bhakta is one who wants nothing from God. Hemerely wants God. He says, O Lord! I want Thee. Nothing else do I want. What is there which Ihave to get after getting Thee, the source and root of everything?
When wheat is obtained, then all its preparations like parotta, halva and other modifications
are also obtained. When gold is obtained, all ornaments of gold are also obtained. When God isattained, everything else is attained. The devotee is lost in the consciousness of God. He plungesinto the ocean of bliss. He takes a bath in the sea of nectar. He drinks deep of the essence ofimmortality. He becomes an Apta-Kama, for he attains God.
70THE FOUR TYPES OF DEVOTEESThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 25
BHAKTAS ARE ABOVE CASTE & CREED
For, taking refuge in Me, they also who, O Partha, may be of a sinful birth—women,
Vaishyas as well as Sudras—even they attain the Supreme Goal!
(IX-32)
In the Adhyatma Ramayana also Sri Rama says: “Sex, birth, reputation and status do not
confer any title to My worship; only devotion, Adhikara or fitness, competence do”.
However widely the saints may differ in other respects, they are all alike in their pure and
one-pointed love of God.
You should not judge a devotee or a saint by his birth or literary attainments. Kabir was a
common weaver, Raidas was a sweeper, Nandan an untouchable, Sadan a butcher, and yet they
were great spiritual lights. Visvamitra, Vyasa, Kavasa, Jabala, Mahidasa, Nammalvar, Kannappar,Tukaram and many others were not Brahmins, and yet they were great spiritual luminaries.
In devotion, one’s caste, culture, physical appearance, birth, possessions and occupation do
not matter. He who has dedicated his all at the Feet of the Lord and who constantly remembers theLord, succeeds in attaining God-consciousness, no matter whether he is a Brahmin or a labourer,educated or uneducated, high-born or low-born, good-looking or ugly-looking, wealthy or poor.
Nishada was born in a low caste; Sabari was a rustic woman; Dhruva was an uneducated
young boy; Vidura and Sudama were very poor; Vibhishana was an ugly Rakshasa; Hanuman was amonkey; Jatayu was a bird; Gajendra was an elephant; the Gopis of Brindavan were not initiatedinto Vedic rites. But all these devotees attained God-realisation on account of their devotion andself-surrender.
The institution of Varnashrama is not condemned thereby. Bhakti and observance of the
rules of Varnashrama are two separate things. They should not be confounded. Those who try toabolish the distinction in the name of Bhakti bring slur on Bhakti. Therefore, devotees should nevertry to repudiate the authority of the scriptures. A devotee should not be treated with contempt onaccount of birth and other things. He should be judged by his purity and devotion alone.Discrimination among devotees on other grounds, like caste, has been declared as an offence inVaishnavite scriptures.
A saint rises above the three Gunas. He has Para-Vidya or the highest knowledge through
direct God-realisation. He shines with the resplendence of divine illumination. He does not belongto one caste or community but to the whole of humanity. That is the reason why there is nodistinction of caste among the saints.
71KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book There is no distinction based upon appearance either. Ashtavakra had eight defects in his
physical appearance. Agastya was a dwarf. Some may be clean-shaven while others may have
matted hair.
Saints can come out of any race. St Francis, St Catherine and several others belonged to the
Western race. They were realised souls. There have been saints among Muslims. Kabir is aninstance. Saintliness is not affected by distinction between the rich and the poor and between oneprofession and another.
The discipline of surrender to the Lord does not demand the special qualifications of caste,
birth, clan and sex. He who has devotion to the Lord is a Brahmin; he who has no faith in the Lord isa Sudra. An outcaste who has devotion and who is leading a life divine is far superior to a Brahminwho is leading a vicious and abominable life.
The distinctions exist when a man is petty-minded. These differences are created by the
mind on account of ignorance. They all melt away when one gets Darshan of God. Love is a greatleveller indeed. It develops equal vision. The advanced Bhakta is one who has transcended theorders or stages of life. The petty rules of society and man-made laws cannot in any way bind him.He becomes absolutely free. He acts from his own viewpoint while resting in God. His will and theCosmic Will have become one. His voice is the voice of God. His words are infallible. God speaksand acts through him. His ways are mysterious and incomprehensible. He takes food from the handsof anybody. He dines with a scavenger even.
Narsi Mehta did Kirtan in the homes of cobblers and scavengers. The orthodox Brahmins
ex-communicated him on this account. He once attended a feast and the other Brahmins ill-treatedhim and looked upon him with contempt. To their amazement they saw a cobbler on either side ofNarsi Mehta. They understood his glory and from that time onwards they began to adore him.
Kanak Das was a great devotee of Lord Krishna. He lived in Udipi, in the district of South
Kanara, in South India. He was not allowed to enter the temple on account of his low birth. KanakDas went around the temple and saw a small window at the back. He seated himself in front of thewindow. He was soon lost in singing songs in praise of Lord Krishna. Many people gathered aroundhim. They were very much attracted by the sweet melody of his songs and the depth of his devotion.The image of Lord Krishna in the temple turned round to enable Kanak Das to get His Darshan. Thepriests were struck with wonder. Even today pilgrims are shown the window and the place whereKanak Das sat and sang.
72BHAKTAS ARE ABOVE CASTE & CREEDThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 26
PRACTICE OF THE REMEMBRANCE OF GOD
I am easily attainable by that ever-steadfast Yogi who constantly remembers Me daily,
not thinking of another, O Partha!
(VIII-14)
Constantly remembering the Lord throughout the life is the surest way of attaining Him. He
who remembers the Lord by fits and starts, who remembers Him for six months and then leaves the
practice, and again remembers Him for six months and so on, cannot attain Him.
Remembrance of the Lord at all times is known as Smarana. It is unbroken memory of the
Name and form of the Lord. The mind does not think of any object of the world. It is ever engrossedin the thought of the glorious Lord alone. The mind meditates on what is heard about the glories ofthe Lord and His virtues and Names, and forgets even the body. It is contented in the remembranceof God, just as Dhruva and Prahlada did. Even Japa is only remembrance of God and comes underthis category of Bhakti. Remembrance also includes listening to the stories pertaining to the Lord,talking of Him, teaching others about Him and meditating on His attributes constantly.
There is no particular time for practising remembrance of God. He is to be remembered at
all times without any break, as long as one has one’s consciousness intact. Right from his getting upfrom sleep in the morning, until he is completely overpowered by sleep at night, a person is toremember God. He has no other duty in this world except the remembrance of God. Theremembrance of God alone can destroy all worldly impressions. The remembrance of God alonecan turn the mind away from sense-objects.
Generally, the mind runs outside, but the remembrance of God makes it introvert and does
not allow it to run to particular objects of the world. The remembrance of God is a very difficultmethod of Sadhana. It is not possible to remember Him at all times continuously. The minddeceives the person. He may think that he is meditating on God but actually he will only be thinkingabout some object of the world or something to do with name and fame. The remembrance is equalto concentration or meditation. All the qualities which a Raja Yogi prescribes for the practice ofmeditation should be acquired by a Bhakta who wishes to practise Smarana-Bhakti. Smarana isswimming against the forceful current of the river of Maya. Smarana leads to exclusive meditationon God, as is practised in Raja Yoga.
The company of sincere devotees is an auxiliary to the remembrance of God. The service of
Mahatmas and saints is yet another necessity. The mind cannot but remember divine things when itis in the company of divine people. Therefore, one should have Satsang and always live with a saintor a great Bhakta. He should not be perturbed by the censure or ridicule of the world. He should relyupon God and rest assured that He will help him in all troubles and grant final emancipation.
73KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book The remembrance of the Lord has given liberation even to those who thought of Him
through hatred, just as a worm, through its hatred and fear of the wasp, meditates on it and attains
the state of the latter. Haters of the Lord, like Kamsa and Sisupala, attained liberation throughVaira-Bhakti. Constant remembrance is the fruit of all the methods of Sadhana. This is the mostpotent method and the most difficult also.
A miser does not forget his wealth even while he is engaged in other duties. A lustful man
does not forget his beloved at any time. A cow does not forget its calf even while it grazes. Even so,a worldly man, though he may be engaged in the duties of life, should practise the remembrance ofGod.
Prahlada practised the remembrance of God. He never forgot God at any time. He was
tortured by his cruel father in all possible manner but the devoted Prahlada crossed all thesetroubles and attained the supreme Grace of the Lord. Prahlada was lost in the consciousness of theLord. Such should be the ardent aspiration of all devotees. The seventh Skanda of the Bhagavata
gives a beautiful description of how Prahlada practised Bhakti even amidst difficult and tryingconditions.
27
THE IMPLICATIONS OF SELF-SURRENDER
Fly unto Him for refuge with all thy being, O Bharata; by His Grace thou shalt obtain
supreme peace and the eternal abode!
(XVIII-62)
Abandoning all duties, take refuge in Me alone; I will liberate thee from all sins; grieve
not.
(XVIII-66)
The gist of the teachings of Lord Krishna is here. If anyone can live in the true spirit of these
verses, he will realise the goal of life soon. There is no doubt of this. The self-surrender must bepure, total, ungrudging and unreserved. You must not keep certain desires for your secretgratification.
A real devotee will not ask the Lord even for liberation. As long as the subtle desire for
liberation lingers in his heart, he cannot claim to be a true devotee. Though the desire foremancipation is of a Sattwic nature, yet the devotee has become a slave of it. He is still selfish andso is unfit to call himself a sincere lover of God. He has not yet made total, unreservedself-surrender. To ask for liberation is a variety of hypocrisy. Can a true devotee dare ask anythingof the Lord, when he knows fully that He is an ocean of love and compassion?
74PRACTICE OF THE REMEMBRANCE OF GODThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book A real devotee never complains against God. A raw Bhakta speaks ill of God when he is in
distress. He says, “I have done twenty-five lakhs of Japa. I am studying the Bhagavata daily. Yet
God is not pleased with me. He has not removed my sufferings. God is blind. He has not heard my
prayers. What sort of God is He? I have no faith in Him.”
A real Bhakta rejoices in suffering, pain and destitution. He welcomes grief and sorrow
always so that he may not forget God even for a second. He has the firm belief that God doeseverything for his good only. Kunti Devi prayed to Krishna: “O Lord! give me pain always. Thenonly will I ever remember Thee.”
In Puri, a saint who had completely dedicated himself to Lord Hari, was seriously ailing
from chronic dysentery. He became quite helpless. Lord Hari served him for months in the form of aservant. The law of Karma is inexorable. None can escape the operation of this infallible law. TheLord did not want the Bhakta to take another birth for the exhaustion of his Prarabdha Karma. Sothe saint had to suffer from the protracted ailment. This was his Karmic purgation. But He himselfserved him, as the saint had surrendered himself completely. Look at the unbounded mercy of theLord! He becomes a slave of His devotees when they depend upon Him entirely.
Self-surrender does not mean retirement into the forest. It does not mean giving up of all
activities. Tamas or inertia is often mistaken for self-surrender. This is a sad mistake. What iswanted is internal surrender. The ego and desire have to be annihilated. The Rajasic mind stands tooobstinate to effect complete self-surrender. The lower nature again and again raises its head toassert itself. There is a resurrection of desires. These desires get suppressed for some time andmanifest with redoubled force. Man is dragged hither and thither by these desires. Believe in divinepossibilities. Completely dedicate yourself to the Lord. Have full trust in Him. Rest in peace. Allcares, worries, anxieties, tribulations and egoistic efforts will now terminate.
Look at the surrender of Prahlada and his faith in God! He had completely resigned himself
to Lord Hari. No other thought save that of God occupied his mind. He had His full Grace andbenediction even though he was ill-treated by his father in a variety of ways. He was hurled downfrom the top of a cliff; he was trampled upon by an elephant; he was poisoned; he was thrown intothe sea with his legs tied with iron chains; cobras were thrown over him; his nose was filled withpoisonous gas; he was thrown into the fire; boiling oil was poured over his head—yet Prahlada’sfaith in Lord Narayana was not shaken even a bit. The Name of Narayana was always on his lips.Such must be the faith of every devotee.
The lower nature must be thoroughly overhauled. All old wrong habits have to be
completely destroyed. Then the surrender becomes complete. Do not make plans and do notspeculate. “Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof”. Keep the mind and intellect passive. Allowthe Divine Will and Grace to work through your mind and senses. Become silent. Feel His Graceand love and enjoy the divine ecstasy. Be at ease.
Pray to God fervently: “O Lord! make my will strong to resist all temptations, to control my
senses and lower nature, to change my old evil habits, and to make my surrender complete and real.Enthrone Thyself in my heart. Do not leave this place even for a second. Use my body, mind andorgans as instruments. Make me fit to dwell in Thee for ever.”
75KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Egoism, ambition and desire are obstacles in the way of self-surrender. Subtle, hidden
desires will try to come to the surface of the mind. Desires which had been suppressed for some
time will again manifest with redoubled force if the aspirant is not careful, if there is some waningin his dispassion and spiritual practice, and if he mixes with worldly-minded people. Generally, theaspirant, consciously or unconsciously, willingly or unwillingly, keeps up some desires for hissecret gratification. He does not wish to part completely with his desires. Therefore, theself-surrender does not become perfect and unreserved. So the Grace of the Lord does not descendin its fullest measure. Even if there is an atom of desire or egoism, there is no possibility of a fullmeasure of the Divine Grace.
Mira says: “I have given up my mind, my heart, my soul, my intellect, my all to my beloved
Girdhar Gopal”. This is complete self-surrender. Mark the words “my all”. The Lord becomes aslave of the Bhakta only when the latter has made absolute, ungrudging self, surrender. He is verycruel and puts His devotee to severe tests and trials. Only when Surdas pricked his eyes with thethorns and remained without food and water in the thick jungle, did Lord Krishna appear before himwith sweetmeats and water. When Draupadi was being disrobed, He did not heed her as long as shetried to keep up her own strength and had traces of egoism. When she cried aloud with perfect
sincerity and total resignation: “O Dwarakanath! O my Beloved! come to my rescue,” He ran to the
scene and she had abundant cloth and her modesty was saved.
Renunciation of egoism is Sarva-Tyaga. It is renunciation of everything. All desires,
selfishness, attraction, repulsion and the body-idea hang on egoism. Egoism is the pivot on which
all these are centred. Kill egoism. Then the surrender will become complete. Even if there is a tingeof egoism, the Lord will not reveal Himself.
The self-arrogating little ego persists and resists again and again. It clings leech-like to its
old habits, cravings and desires. It wages guerilla war. It resists surrender. It demands certainobjects for its secret gratification. The whole being should be surrendered. That is the reason whyLord Krishna says: “Fly unto Him for refuge with all thy being, O Bharata!”
Mark the words, “with all thy being”. The whole heart, mind, intellect, subconscious mind
and soul must be given to God without any reservation. When you meditate, you must be free fromthoughts of fear, worry and anxiety.
Lord Hari came out of a pillar in the form of Narasimha when Prahlada prayed with his full
heart, “with all his being”. Prahlada said to his father, “My Narayana is in your heart. He is in myheart also. He is in this straw. He is in this pillar too.” Prahlada pointed out the four places. But whydid Lord Narayana come out of the pillar? Because Prahlada had his full concentration with fullfeeling on the pillar alone. He wished that Lord Narayana should come out of the pillar. This washis concentrated thought.
The vulgar, stiff, obstinate ego is harder than diamond, reinforced concrete or steel. It is
very difficult to melt it. Constant vigilance and ceaseless effort are necessary to slay this dire enemyof peace and wisdom. It keeps many subtle desires for its own silent gratification. Introspect andfind out these subtle desires that lurk in the corners of your heart with the searchlight ofconcentration and discrimination, and kill them ruthlessly through regular, silent meditation.
76THE IMPLICATIONS OF SELF-SURRENDERThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Do not bother about taking too much care of your body. God will save it if He needs it for
further service. Surrender it at His Feet and rest in peace. He will take care of it. A real devotee says,
“Let me take millions of births, it does not matter. But let me be attached to the Lotus Feet of LordHari. Let me have spontaneous devotion to the Lord. Let me be endowed with purity, spiritualstrength, the spirit of selfless service and divine virtues.”
If you simply say without real inner feeling, “I am thine, O Lord!” this will not constitute
real integral self-surrender. It should come from the core of your heart. You must be prepared for aradical change. You should not stick to your old habits, ways and motives. You should not expectthat everything should happen in the way you want. You should live to carry out the divine purpose.You should not think of those ambitions which the mind likes to gratify. You should not think ofusing even the Divine Grace or the divine force for your own purpose. The irrepressible ego willassert itself in various ways and refuse to give up its old habits. It will try to get everything from theDivine. It will totally decline to give itself to the Divine. That is the reason why aspirants do notmake any substantial progress on the spiritual path even after doing Sadhana for several years.
Only when the devotee has completely killed his egoism, when he has made perfect
self-surrender without any reservation or any secret desire for his gratification, when he thirsts likea fish that is out of the water for meeting his Beloved, when he feels the separation from the Lordintensely, when the fire of separation scorches him to the extreme degree,—then and only then willthe Lord appear before the devotee. Then only will He wipe his tears, feed him with His own handsand carry him on His shoulders.
There is no loss in total, unreserved self-surrender. It is not at all a bad bargain. It is a mighty
gain indeed. You will have to give up your body, mind, soul and possessions unto Him. The Lordwill then give Himself unto you in a similar measure. The whole wealth of the Lord will then belongto you. He will become your own. You would have purchased Him by showing your love unto Him.He will become your slave now. You will become one with the Lord, just as the sugar, whendissolved in water, becomes one with the water. What He wants is your whole heart, fully chargedwith pure love. The devotee should say, “I am Thine and Thou art mine also.” Even if there is theslightest tinge of selfishness, you cannot attain Him.
The lover who has developed supreme love is not a slave of forms, formalities and dogmas.
He is not bound by the rules of society. There is no outward show. There is no ringing of bells. Hedoes not care for the sarcastic remarks of the world. His state is indescribable.
In self-surrender the devotee offers everything to God, including his body, mind and soul.
He keeps nothing for himself. He loses even his own little self. He has no personal and independentexistence. He has given up his self to God. He has become a part and parcel of God. God takes careof him and treats him as Himself. Grief and sorrow, pleasure and pain, the devotee treats as giftssent by God and does not attach himself to them. He considers himself as a puppet of God and aninstrument in His hands. He does not feel egoistic, for he has no ego. His ego has gone over to God.It is not his duty to take care of his wife and children, for he himself has no independent existenceapart from God. God will take care of all. He knows how to lead the world on the right path. Oneneed not think that one is born to lead the world. God is there who will look to everything whichman cannot even dream of.
77KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book The devotee has no sensual craving, for he has no body, since it has been offered to God. He
does not adore or love his body, for it is God’s business to see to its welfare. He only feels the
Presence of God and nothing else. He is fearless, for God is with him at all times. He has no enemy,for he has given himself up to God, who has no enemies or friends. He has no anxiety, for he hasattained everything by attaining His Grace. He has not even the thought of salvation; rather, he doesnot want salvation even. He merely wants God and nothing but God. He is satisfied with the love ofGod, for by that there is nothing that is not attained. What is there to be attained when God has sentHis Grace upon the devotee? The devotee does not want to become sugar but wants to taste it. Thereis pleasure in tasting sugar but not in becoming sugar itself. So the devotee feels that there issupreme joy more in loving God than in becoming one with Him. God thus takes complete care ofthe devotee. “I am Thine,” says the devotee.
This self-surrender is absolute love of God. There is nothing but God-consciousness in the
devotee. Even against his own wishes the devotee becomes one with the Lord and loses hisindividuality. This is the law of being. The highest Truth is absoluteness and the soul rises abovethrough different states of consciousness until it attains absolute perfection when it becomesidentical with God. This is the culmination of all aspiration and love.
Self-surrender is the annihilation of the individual consciousness and the attainment of
Absolute Consciousness. This is equal to Nirvikalpa Samadhi. The devotee flies to the state of thehighest Mahabhava and merges himself in God. The wave subsides in the ocean. The sparkbecomes one with the fire. The ray is absorbed into the sun. The mind merges in the Absolute. Theindividual soul loses itself in the Self. The devotee becomes one with God. All worldlyconsciousness vanishes into universal Consciousness. Man becomes God and the mortal becomesthe Immortal.
Whatever belongs to God becomes the possession of this highest of devotees. All his sins
are destroyed. He has no duties to perform. He is a perfected soul. He is the most blessed. To himthe whole world appears as mere bliss. There is only the manifestation of supreme love everywhere.
The Gopis and Bali Chakravarti practised this love. The Gopis lost themselves in Sri
Krishna. Bali, the king, offered his self to the Lord. The Gopis lost themselves in Godconsciousness and attained the Supreme.
There are innumerable verses in both the Bhagavad Gita and the Bhagavata establishing the
truth that self-surrender is the only way of attaining the Supreme. Krishna teaches Arjuna thatself-surrender—total and exclusive alone—can give him peace and relieve him of all his sins.
Give up all ideas of duty and responsibility. Allow the Divine Will to work unhampered
now. This is the secret of surrender. You will now feel yourself a changed being. This exalted stateis ineffable. A great transformation will come upon you. You will be enveloped in a halo of divineeffulgence. You will be drowned in indescribable bliss, peace and joy. Your old little self will nowbe dead. You will be a changed spiritual being. Your individual will will be merged in the CosmicWill. You will be illumined with the Divine Light. All ignorance will have disappeared.
78THE IMPLICATIONS OF SELF-SURRENDERThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Enjoy the immortal, divine life wherein there is neither despair nor fear, neither hunger nor
thirst, neither doubt nor delusion. Shine in divine splendour and glory, O my beloved Viswanath!
Radiate peace and joy all around.
28
AWAY WITH DESPONDENCY
Let that be known by the name of Yoga, the severance from union with pain. This
Yoga should be practised with determination and an undesponding mind.
(VI-23)
A timid man is absolutely unfit for the attainment of Self-realisation. A coward dies several
times before his death. Have no attachment to this mortal body of flesh and bone. Cast it off like aslough anywhere, just as a snake throws away its skin. Make up your mind to give up the body atany moment. Become absolutely fearless.
As long as there is the least identification with the body, so long you cannot expect
Self-realisation. Exhibit an undaunted spirit and manliness. Make a firm resolve: “I will realise ordie.”
Do not lose heart when you are in adverse circumstances. Face all difficulties with a smiling
countenance. Become a real warrior and fight your enemies within—the mind, senses, desires,impressions and cravings—which have robbed you of your Atmic jewel. Become a hero on thespiritual battlefield. You will then excel the Mussolinis and Hitlers. The spiritual battlefielddemands a greater valour, patience, perseverance, strength, courage and skill than the battlefield inthe outer world. Be a lion. Temptations will manifest all of a sudden without a moment’s notice.You will be bewildered. There may not be any time to detect them. So be always on the alert.
O man! do not be discouraged when sorrows, difficulties and tribulations manifest in the
daily battle of life. Thou art the master of thy destiny. Thou art divine. Live up to it. Feel and realisethy divine nature. Draw courage and spiritual strength from within. There is a vast, inexhaustiblemagazine of power and knowledge within. Learn the ways to tap the source. Dive deep within. Sinkdown. Plunge into the sacred waters of immortality—the holy Triveni within. You will be quiterefreshed, renovated and vivified.
Understand the laws of the universe. Move tactfully in this world. Learn the secrets of
Nature. Try to know the best ways to control the mind. Conquer this mind. The conquest of themind is really the conquest of Nature and the world.
Do not murmur. Do not grumble when troubles and sorrows descend upon you. Difficulties
strengthen your will, augment your power of endurance and turn your mind towards God. Facethem with a smile. In your weakness lies your real strength. Thou art invincible. Nothing can harm
79KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book you. Conquer the difficulties one by one. This is the beginning of a new spiritual life, a life of
expansion, glory and divine splendour. Aspire and draw. Grow. Expand, O Nirmala bold! Build upall positive virtuous qualities like fortitude, patience and courage that are dormant in you. Start anew life.
Have a new angle of vision. Arm yourself with cheerfulness, discrimination, discernment
and an undaunted spirit. A glorious, brilliant future is awaiting you. Let the past be buried. You canwork miracles. You can do wonders. Do not give up hope. You can destroy all the harmful effects ofunfavourable planets through your pure will-force. You can command the elements and Nature.You can neutralise the effects and the evil influences of the dark, antagonistic forces that mayoperate against you. You can change unfavourable circumstances into the best possible ones. Youcan nullify destiny. Many have done this. You also can do so. Assert. Recognise. Realise. Claim thybirthright now. Thou art the immortal Self.
Determination and self-reliance are very necessary for success in Self-realisation. In the
Mundaka Upanishad you will find: “This Atman cannot be realised by one who is destitute of
strength”. Fearlessness is an important qualification for an aspirant. One should be prepared torenounce one’s life at any moment. Without the renunciation of this little sensual life the eternalspiritual life cannot be attained. The quality of fearlessness comes first in the divine qualities thatare enumerated in the Gita. A timid man or coward dies several times before his actual death. Every
difficulty that comes on the path of spirituality is an opportunity to grow stronger and to developyour will. When you have once decided to take to the spiritual path, stick to it at any cost, nay, at therisk of your life itself, come what may. Thou art the immortal Self. Be bold. Stand up. Gird up theloins. Realise the Truth. Proclaim it everywhere.
Destiny is your own creation. You have created your destiny through thoughts and actions.
You can undo the same through right thinking and right action. Even if there is an evil andantagonistic force to attack you, you can diminish its force by resolutely denying the existence ofevil or resolutely turning your mind away from it. Thus, you can disarm destiny. The one thought, “Iam the immortal Self” will neutralise all evil forces and influences of all malevolent planets andwill infuse in you courage and inner spiritual strength. Wrong thinking is the root-cause of allhuman suffering. Cultivate right thought and right action. Think that you are the immortal Self.This is right thinking. Work unselfishly in terms of unity, with the feeling that you are serving theLord in all, that all your actions are worship of Him. This is right action.
There is no such thing as sin. Sin is only a mistake. It is a mental creation. The baby-soul has
to commit some mistakes during the process of its evolution. Mistakes are your best teachers. Thinkthat you are the pure Atman. Then the idea of sin will be blown into the air.
Do not say, “Karma, Karma; my Karma has brought me to this state.” Exert. Practise
austerity. Concentrate. Purify. Meditate. Do not become a fatalist. Do not yield to inertia. Do notbleat like a lamb. Roar, “Om, Om, Om,” like a lion of Vedanta. See how Markandeya, who wasdestined to die in his sixteenth year became a Chiranjeevi, an immortal boy of sixteen years, onaccount of his austerity. Note how Savitri brought back her husband to life through her austerity,how Benjamin Franklin and the late Sir T. Muthuswami Aiyer of the Madras High Court elevatedthemselves.
80AWAY WITH DESPONDENCYThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Remember, friends, that man is the master of his destiny. Viswamitra Rishi, who was a
Kshatriya Raja, became a Brahmarshi like Vasishtha and even created a third world for Trisanku by
his power of austerity. Rogues Jagai and Madhai of Bengal became highly developed saints. Theybecame the disciples of Lord Gauranga. What others have done, you also can do. There is no doubtof this. You can also do wonders and miracles if you apply yourself to spiritual Sadhana, austerityand meditation.
Read the book, Poverty to Power by James Allen, with interest and attention. You will be
inspired. Draw up a programme for your life. Follow my Twenty Important Spiritual Instructions
andForty Golden Precepts. Read my books, Practice of Yoga andPractice of Vedanta. Adhere to
the daily spiritual routine. Apply yourself with zeal and enthusiasm to Sadhana. Become a perfectBrahmachari. Be steady and systematic in your Yoga practices. Shine in your native, pristineBrahmic glory. Become a liberated sage. You are a child of immortality and light. Success is boundto manifest itself if you apply yourself with full trust and confidence in the Divine. Therefore,despair not. “Tat Twam Asi—Thou Art That” my dear brothers.
29
AUSTERITY OF SPEECH
Speech which causes no excitement, truthful, pleasant and beneficial, the practice of
the study of the Vedas, are called austerity of speech.
(XVII-15)
The words of a man who practises austerity of speech cannot cause pain to others. His words
will bring cheer and solace to others. His words will prove beneficial to all.
The control of speech is a difficult discipline but you will have to practise it if you want to
attain supreme peace. Nothing is impossible for a man who has firm determination, sincerity ofpurpose, iron will, patience and perseverance.
Manu says: “One should speak what is true; one should speak what is sweet; one should not
speak what is true if it is not sweet, or what is sweet if it is false; this is the ancient Dharma”.
Speech, to be austere, must form an invariable combination of all the four attributes
mentioned in this utterance of Manu. That is to say, it must be non-exciting and non-painful,truthful, pleasant and beneficial at the same time. If it is wanting in one or the other of theseattributes, it cannot form austerity of speech. A speech may be pleasant, but if it is lacking in theother three attributes, it will no longer be considered austere.
Words possess tremendous power. By words you can encourage and cheer others. By words
you can give the greatest happiness to others. By words you can ruin and displease others. By wordsthe Guru imparts his knowledge to his students. By words the mother trains her children. By words
81KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book the orator keeps his audience spellbound. Word is Brahman or God in manifestation. So be careful
in the selection of your words. Use sweet words and conquer the hearts of others. Never use harshwords. Understand and realise the power of words and become wise.
You must practise austerity of speech if you really wish to attain quick progress in
meditation. You must always utter sweet, loving words. You must speak the truth at any cost. Youmust not speak any harsh or indecent word that is calculated to hurt the feelings of others. Youshould weigh your words before they are spoken. You must speak a few words only. This isausterity of speech that will conserve energy and give you peace of mind and inner strength.
Uttering harsh words, uttering falsehood, speaking ill of another at his back, and idle
gossiping, are the four evil actions of the tongue. If you guard your tongue, you will be safe. Youwill have peace.
Before you speak, think carefully of the influence which every word will produce on the
feelings of others. If it is likely to hurt the feelings of others, avoid those words. Do not bring theminto expression.
Discipline the tongue properly. Think thrice before you speak, before you utter a word.
Know the power of each word that you utter and the effect it will produce on the minds of others. Donot allow the tongue to run riot. Do not be garrulous. Speak a few words. Speak sweet and lovingwords. A word spoken once cannot be taken back, like a shot sent at a target. Be careful in yourspeech. It is the speech that wounds a person more than the action. A harsh speech bleeds the heartand not the body. The wound in the body heals quickly but the wound in the heart caused byoffensive speech never heals. The sufferings of the body are transitory and easily forgotten but notthe sufferings of the heart. Speak measured words. Make this a habit through protracted practice.You can then talk cautiously without thinking.
Avoid superfluity in words and be considerate in speech. Think before you talk. Never utter
such words as may wound the feelings of others. Watch carefully the thoughts that arise in yourmind when you move in society. Avoid impulsive speeches, emotional utterances and boisterous,bubbling expressions. Be calm, cool, serene and tranquil. Manifest a dignified personality or amagnanimous attitude.
The organ of speech produces a great deal of distraction and various sorts of quarrels. It is a
restless sense. People generally talk at random whatever comes out of their lips, without anythought and care. They jest at the expense of others. In the end they fight with one another overnothing at all, over a little play of words.
Weigh every word in your inner, mental balance before it comes out. Every word is filled
with Shakti or power. That man who possesses the faculty of weighing his words before expressingthem will have great peace of mind. All his words will be powerful. They will produce atremendous impression on his hearers.
82AUSTERITY OF SPEECHThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book The control over speech is as important as control over thought. Use measured words in
writing and in speech. Lord Jesus was the only sage who used measured words in his speech.
Mahatma Gandhiji was another example.
Too much talking is a bad habit which lessens the spiritual power. If a man talks too much
he suffers from diarrhoea of the tongue. Quiet people cannot sit even for a second in the company ofthese loquacious or garrulous people. They will talk five hundred words per minute! There is anelectric talking-dynamo in their tongue. They are restless people. If you lock these people for a dayin a solitary room, they will die.
An enormous amount of energy is wasted by excessive talking. The energy that is spent in
talking should be carefully and vigilantly conserved and utilised for spiritual practices and in divinecontemplation. The organ of speech distracts the mind considerably. A talkative man cannot dreamof having peace even for a short time. Therefore, an aspirant should speak only a few words whennecessary and that too on spiritual matters only. A talkative man is unfit for the spiritual path.
30
CONQUEST OF ANGER
But by what impelled does man commit sin, though against his wishes, O Varshneya,
constrained, as it were, by force?
(III-36)
It is desire, it is anger born of the Rajo-Guna, all-devouring, all-sinful; know this as
the foe here.
(III-37)
When a man thinks of objects, attachment to them arises; from attachment desire is
born; from desire anger arises.
(II-62)
From anger comes delusion; from delusion loss of memory; from loss of memory the
destruction of discrimination; from destruction of discrimination he perishes.
(II-63)
He who is able, while still here, to withstand, before the liberation from the body, the
impulse born out of desire and anger, he is a Yogin, he is a happy man.
(V-23)
83KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book It will be admitted on all hands that every one of us, without any exception whatsoever, is a
victim of this horrible malady. Indeed, control of anger will bring in its train supreme peace and
immeasurable joy. As such, let me presently describe in detail what anger is, its various forms, howit affects the nervous system, its exact relationship with passion and, lastly, the various practicalmethods that can be safely employed to effectively eradicate it root and branch. My one ferventappeal to all is that you will apply yourselves heart and soul in eradicating this dire disease byfollowing these valuable practices.
Anger is a modification that arises in the mind-lake when the Gunas, Rajas and Tamas
predominate. It is a Rajo-Guna modification. Some take it as a Tamo-Guna modification. It is awave of unpleasant feeling that arises from the inner instrument when one gets displeased withanother. It is, in other words, a modification of desire or passion. Just as milk is changed into curd,so also desire becomes changed into anger. It is the most formidable enemy of peace, knowledgeand devotion. It is the straightest road to hell itself.
Anger is a manifestation of Shakti. In the Chandipath orDurga Saptashati you will find: “I
bow again and again to that Devi who is seated in all beings in the form of anger”.
Anger resides in the astral body but percolates into the physical body just as water
percolates through the pores to the outer surface of an earthen pot.
Irritation, frowning, resentment, indignation, rage, fury and wrath are all varieties of anger,
according to the degree or intensity.
If a man wants to correct and eradicate a vice in another and manifests slight anger
unselfishly as a force to check and improve him, then it is called “righteous anger” or “spiritualanger”. Suppose a man molests a woman and tries to outrage her modesty; if a bystander becomesangry with the criminal, it is called “righteous indignation” or “noble rage”. This is not bad. Onlywhen the anger is the outcome of greed or selfish motives is it bad.
Sometimes a religious teacher has to manifest a little anger outwardly to correct his
disciples. This is not bad. He has to do it. But he should be cool within and hot and impetuouswithout. He should not allow the anger to take deep root in his mind for a long time. It should passoff the next moment, even as a wave subsides in the sea.
Anger arises in a person when he thinks of his enemy. Even if you have forgotten the feeling
of annoyance, it lurks in the mind in a dormant form. The effect is there for some time. If you renewthe feeling of jealousy, envy or hatred about the same person a number of times, the effect lasts for alonger time. The repetition of an angry feeling intensifies hatred. Mere ill-feeling develops intointense malice by the repetition of anger.
On days when you have many troubles, vexations and worries from morning till evening, a
trifling thing causes much irritation in the mind. The balance of mind is upset by a paltry affair. Asingle harsh word throws you out of balance. On the contrary, when you are peaceful throughout theday, even strong abuse and severe censure do not produce any effect whatsoever.
84CONQUEST OF ANGERThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book When a man’s desire is not gratified and when someone stands in the way of its fulfilment,
he gets angry. The desire gets transmuted into anger. When a man is under the sway of anger, he
commits all sorts of sinful deeds. He loses his memory, his understanding becomes clouded and hisintellect gets perverted. Just as heat melts lead, just as heat and borax melt gold, even so, desire andanger, the heating factors of the mind, melt it. When you are angry the mind gets disturbed.Similarly, when the mind is disturbed, the body also gets disturbed. The whole nervous system isagitated. You become enervated.
Anger spoils the brain, the nervous system and the blood. When a wave arises in the mind,
the Prana begins to vibrate rapidly. You get agitated and excited. The blood becomes hot. Manypoisonous ingredients are formed in the blood. When the blood is agitated, the semen also isaffected.
When one is angry, dark, fiery arrows shoot out from the astral body. These can be seen
clearly by the clairvoyant eye. In the light of modern psychology all diseases take their origin inanger. Rheumatism, heart disease and nervous diseases are all due to anger.
Once a child suckled the breast of its mother when she was in a fit of violent fury or rage.
The child died immediately on account of poisoning by virulent chemical products that werethrown into the blood of the mother while she was in great excitement. Many such cases have beenrecorded. Such are the disastrous effects of anger. Even three minutes of violent hot temper mayproduce such deleterious effects on the nervous system that it may take weeks or months for therepair of the injury.
Anger clouds understanding. When the mind is violently agitated, you cannot understand a
passage of a book clearly. You cannot write a letter with a cool mind. When the lamp is flickeringbecause of the wind, you cannot see the objects clearly. Even so, when the intellect flickers or isagitated by anger, chaos is caused in it and you are not able to see and understand things properly.
An angry man may commit murder. He himself does not know what he is exactly doing. He
becomes emotional and impulsive. A man, when he is angry, will talk anything. He will do anythinghe likes. A hot word results in fighting and stabbing. The angry man is under intoxication. He loseshis consciousness for the time being. He falls a prey to anger.
A man who is a slave of anger may have washed himself well, anointed himself properly,
dressed his hair and put on white garments; yet he is ugly, being overcome by anger. There aresymptoms on the face to indicate the presence of anger in the mind. If you get angry often you willlose the battle of life. If you have an easily irritable mind, you will not be able to do your daily dutiesin an efficient manner.
If a man becomes irritable over trifling matters very often, it is a definite sign of mental
weakness. When a person abuses you and when he takes away your cloth or coat, if you remaincalm and serene, that is a positive sign of inner strength. Self-restraint or self-control is a sign ofgreat mental strength. An easily irritable man is always unjust. He is swayed by impulses andemotions.
85KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Anger gains strength by repetition. If it is checked then and there, the man gains immense
strength of will. When anger is controlled it becomes transmuted into spiritual energy that can
move the three worlds. Just as heat or light is changed into electricity, so also anger becomeschanged into Ojas or spiritual energy.
Enormous energy is wasted when one gets angry. The whole nervous system is shattered by
an outburst of anger. The eyes become red, the body quivers, the legs and hands tremble. No onecan check an angry man. He gets enormous strength for the time being and suffers a collapse aftersome time on account of reaction.
Too much loss of semen is the main cause of irritability and anger. Passion is the root and
anger the stem. You will have to destroy the root—passion—first. Then the stem—anger—will dieby itself. A passionate man is subject to greater anger. A man who has wasted his seminal energy toa great extent becomes irritated easily over little things even. A Brahmachari who has preserved hisvital fluid always maintains a balanced mind. He has a cool brain at all times.
The root-cause of anger is egoism. Through right enquiry, egoism can be removed. Then
alone can one control one’s anger completely. Through development of the opposite virtues, suchas mercy, love, peace and friendship, anger can be controlled to an enormous degree. The force canbe reduced. The knowledge of the Atman alone can fry all the impressions of anger and eradicatethem in toto.
If an aspirant has controlled anger, then half of his Sadhana is over. The control of anger
means control of lust also. Control of anger is really control of the mind. He who has controlledanger cannot do any wrong or evil action. He is always just in his dealings with others.
It is very difficult to say when a man will be thrown into a fit of fury. All of a sudden he gets
an irresistible fit of anger over trifling matters. When anger assumes a grave form, it becomesdifficult to control. It should therefore be controlled even when it is in the form of a small ripple inthe subconscious mind. One should watch one’s mind very, very cautiously. Whenever there is theleast symptom or indication of slight irritability, then and there it must be nipped. Then it willbecome very easy to control anger. Be careful and vigilant and watch the ripple. Then only are yousafe.
When anger tries to exhibit itself, observe silence. Keep quiet. Never utter harsh words or
use obscene language. Try to nip the anger before it emerges from the subconscious mind. Youhave to be very alert. It will try to come out suddenly. Before it manifests there is agitation in themind. You must try to extirpate this agitation in the mind before it assumes a very gross form in theshape of twitching of the muscles of the face, clenching of teeth and red eyes. You have to punishthe mind severely. You have to impose self-restraint on yourself by way of fasting for a daywhenever you give vent to anger or agitation.
If you strive and make a sincere effort to subdue your anger, then hatred also will cease.
Even then a slight movement of impatience may linger although the angry feeling may have gone.You must eschew this slight disturbance also. For a man who is leading the divine life this is a veryserious drawback.
86CONQUEST OF ANGERThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Whenever there is a little irritability, stop all conversation and observe silence. The practice
of silence daily for one or two hours is of great help in controlling anger. Always try to speak sweet,
soft words. The words must be soft and the arguments hard; but if the reverse is the case, it will leadto discord and disharmony. There is a sharp sword in every tongue.
If you find it difficult to control anger, leave the place at once and take a brisk walk. Drink
some cold water immediately. This cools down the body and the mind. Chant Om loudly like a lionfor ten minutes, and then chant Om Shanti mentally or verbally for five minutes.
Think of the picture of your Deity. Pray. Repeat your Mantra for ten minutes. Gradually the
anger will disappear.
Find out the real cause of your anger and try to eradicate it. If a man abuses you and calls
you names, you become furious at once. Your blood becomes hot. Why do you feel offended whensomeone calls you a dog or a donkey? Have you now developed four legs and a tail like a dog? Why
do you get excited over trifling things? Enquire: “What is this abuse? Is it not a mere vibration in the
ether? Am I the body or the Atman? No one can injure the Atman. The Atman of the abuser and the
abused is one. Do I really gain anything by retaliating? I waste my energy. I hurt the feelings ofanother man. I disturb and pollute the thought-world. I do real harm to the world by sending acurrent of hatred. This world is unreal. I will live here for a short time only. Let me bear this insult.Let me excuse the man. I will then develop inner mental strength and power of endurance.”
You can thus very effectively eradicate the feeling of anger. A time will come when you
will not get irritated even a bit by harsh words, abuses and insults of this kind. You will not pay theleast heed if a man says that such and such a person has been gossiping about you. You will simplylaugh away the whole matter.
You show your anger towards your servants, inferiors and helpless and weak persons only.
But you do not show it towards your master or superior or strong persons. Why? Because youpractise some sort of self-restraint on account of fear. Can you not practise self-restraint towardsyour servants also? If you attempt to see the Lord in the servant you will not become angry withhim. Anger will bring about your destruction. A person who gets irritated easily is very weak andhas no mental strength. Under the influence of anger only he commits crimes, does wrong actions,insults elders and utters harsh words.
You should control anger by all the different means. Develop patience, forbearance,
compassion, tolerance, mercy and love. Practise self-analysis and introspection. Enquire: “Who amI?” Enquire within yourself: “What do I gain by becoming angry? All my energy is lost when I givevent to anger. The Self is one. The Self is common in all beings. There is no anger in the Self. Inhurting another, I hurt myself only. There is nothing but my own Self in everyone. The Self is anembodiment of peace.” When you enquire and reflect in this manner the wave of anger will die byitself.
When you become angry towards your servant if he fails to supply your usual milk one day,
raise a question within yourself: “Why should I be a slave of milk? O mind! why do you want milk?
87KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Why should I waste my energy by getting angry?” Then the wave of anger will subside at once. It
will not arise on other occasions also if you are careful and reflective.
When you become angry, look at your face in the mirror. You will be ashamed to look at
your awful and ghastly face. This is another way of controlling anger. Then in future you will becareful in checking the impulse that induces a fit of anger.
Nip anger in the bud. Keep quiet and at once begin to do Japa whenever there is any
occasion of you becoming angry. By following this method the chance of your getting angry will bedecreased. Eventually you will be free of anger.
Do not speak when you become angry, when the anger is in the form of simple irritability.
Watch. Put a break in time before it assumes the form of a big wave of anger. Start the Japa.Cultivate forgiveness. Anger can be destroyed, not by attacking it but by cultivating the oppositevirtues of love and patience. Do not express anger but try to control it. First try to cut short itsduration by turning the mind to Japa, study, Kirtan or any other pleasant occupation. Thin out thewave of anger first. Reduce its force by occupying the mind with some work or by diverting themind.
Gradually, the burning caused by anger will subside. The force born of anger will lose its
intensity. The attacks will not recur frequently. They will not persist for a long time. The spiritualstrength born of the Sattwic potencies will come to your aid. The mind will become calmer as timegoes on.
Anger can be burnt in toto only through the attainment of Nirvikalpa Samadhi. If you thin
out this evil impulse through regular Japa and meditation, if you mitigate its force, it will not do anyharm. It will be like a cobra whose poisonous fangs have been rooted out. It may raise its hood andhiss sometimes but it can be controlled quite easily. You should not speak anything that is likely toinjure even the feelings of others. You should try to control irritability and annoyance. You shouldnot use terms like “fool”, “nonsense ”,“rascal” and “damn” when you become excited. Watch every
word that comes out of your lips. If you really want to eradicate these evil habits and traits you willhave to be in close contact with a developed Yogi or with your Guru for some years. You cannotdetect your own defects. You will have to obey his instructions implicitly.
You must try to remain cool and calm even under the most provocative conditions. If you
are hungry and if you suffer from any disease, you will generally become more irritable. If you havesome troubles, difficulties or losses, you get irritated over little matters.
If a Sannyasin living in a cave says that he has controlled anger, you cannot believe him.
The waves are for the time being suppressed. There are no occasions for him to get angry. If sometransactions take place, if he is ill-treated, he will again manifest his anger. The world is a bettertraining ground for the control of anger.
An aspirant should direct all his attention towards the conquest of this powerful enemy.
Sattwic food, Japa, regular meditation, prayer, Satsang, service, enquiry, Kirtan, practice of
88CONQUEST OF ANGERThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Pranayama and Brahmacharya—all these are some of the most potent factors that pave a long way
in eradicating this dire malady. A combined method should be adopted in its eradication.
Smoking, meat-eating and drinking of liquor make men very irritable. Therefore, these
should be completely abandoned. Be careful in the choice of your company. When you remain inthe world the association of worldly persons is unavoidable. Cut short the conversation and theperiod of mixing with them. Give up the company of evil characters. Talk little. Mix little. Plungeyourself in spiritual Sadhana. Develop mercy, universal love and compassion.
Meditate in the morning on the virtue of patience for ten minutes. Reflect and repeat the
formula “Om patience” mentally several times daily. Remember the saints and their lives. Say untoyourself, “I am patient now. I will never get irritated from today. I will manifest the virtue ofpatience in my daily life. I am getting better and better.”
Feel that you possess a magazine of patience. Think of the advantages of possessing this
virtue and the evil effects of irritability. You may fail many times but you will develop patiencegradually and become an embodiment of patience.
Do not identify yourself with the impulse of anger. When a wave arises in the mind-lake,
stand as a witness of the wave. Become a spectator. Say unto yourself: “I am a witness of thismodification. I am distinct from this wave. I have nothing to do with this wave.” Then the wave willdie by itself. It will not disturb you. Identification with the impulse of anger is the cause of humansuffering. Identify yourself with the Self. Stand like a lion as a spectator of the mental menagerie.
When there is one Self in all beings, how can you hurt another being? On account of
ignorance you forget yourself and harm your neighbour when he abuses you. You are overpoweredby anger and then give him a blow. When the rage subsides you repent very much for your wrongaction. Though you repent you repeat the sinful action after some time. Why? Because you have noinner strength to control your impulses and emotions.
“Tit for tat”, “tooth for tooth”, “eye for an eye”, “to pay one in the same coin” is the doctrine
of the savage or demoniacal man. This is his beastly or animal nature.
“To return good for evil”, “to show the other cheek”, “to pray for that man who has
persecuted you”, “to see God in the thief, in a cobra and in the fallen sister of ill-fame” is thedoctrine of a God-man. This is divine nature.
Think constantly of the disastrous effects of anger and the good that comes if you have
perfect control over it. Many have ruined themselves by becoming slaves of this passion. You donot gain anything by exhibiting anger towards another man. The immediate cause of the outbreak ofa war is anger. Read the pages of history. You will find that many nations have ruined themselvesby yielding to anger. When a desire is not gratified, it assumes the form of anger immediately.Quarrels between a husband and wife in the home arise daily because the husband has not satisfiedthe wants of his wife.
89KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Anger and lust are the Shaktis of Brahman. They are the potencies of Brahman. That is why
they are insatiable and not easily conquered. But they can be very easily overcome through the
exercise of discrimination—another potency of Brahman—which is far more powerful. The man inwhom this discrimination has dawned will gain control slowly over desire. He will eventually enjoypeace of mind.
Manifest your inner spiritual strength by eradicating all anger and cultivating love towards
all beings, who are none other than your own self. Realise the Satchidananda Atman.
Glory unto those who have rooted out their anger and attained knowledge of the Self!
31
THE POWER OF PASSION
The turbulent senses, O son of Kunti, do violently carry away the mind of a wise man
though he be striving to control them!
(II-60)
You are all aware of how sage Visvamitra, who performed great austerities, fell a victim to
the influence of a celestial nymph. Narada also was tested by Lord Hari. Narada failed in thebeginning. He was not able to understand the subtle workings of Maya. Even Lord Buddha wastested for his mental purity. He had to face temptations of every kind. He had to face Mara. It wasonly then, and not till then, that he had illumination under the Bodhi tree in Gaya. Satan temptedJesus in a variety of ways.
Passion is very powerful. Many aspirants fail in the tests. One has to be very careful.
Spiritual seekers will have to develop a very high standard of mental purity. Then alone will they beable to stand the test. God will place the aspirant in very unfavourable surroundings to test him. Hewill be tempted by young girls. Name and fame bring aspirants in close contact with householders.Women begin to worship them. They become their disciples. Gradually the aspirants get a nastydownfall. Instances are many. Aspirants should therefore hide themselves and just pass for ordinarypeople. They should avoid making a display of their abilities and powers.
This world is full of temptations. There is danger of a fall at every moment. A beginner is
often unable to resist a temptation. He falls a prey to its influence quite readily. The aspirant must bevery careful. He should observe the injunctions of the Shastras. They pave a long way in keeping
him from falling. He should not test his spiritual strength at the very outset when he has made a littleprogress only. Reaction may set in. The senses will revolt. The mind will become furious. He willbecome a victim to passion. Even at the present moment such instances of Yogis who have fallenare not lacking. When one is put to the test he fails.
90CONQUEST OF ANGERThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Once upon a time, Sri Veda Vyasa was conducting his Vedanta class amongst his students.
In the course of his lecture, he mentioned that young Brahmacharis should be very careful and not
mix with young women. With all their vigilance and circumspection they might fall victims as lustwas very powerful. One of his students, Jaimini, the author of Purva Mimamsa, was a little
impertinent. He said, “Guru Maharaj, your statement is wrong. No lady can attract me. I am wellestablished in Brahmacharya.”
Vyasa said, “Jaimini, you will know about it soon. I shall be proceeding to Kashi tomorrow.
I shall return within three months. Be careful. Do not be puffed up with pride.”
Sri Vyasa, through his Yogic powers, assumed the form of a beautiful, young girl, with
piercing eyes and a very charming face, well dressed in a thin silken garment. The lady wasstanding under a tree at sunset. Clouds gathered and it began to rain. Jaimini happened to pass alongthe route. He saw the girl, felt pity for her and addressed her thus, “O lady! you can come and stay inour Ashram. I shall give you shelter.”
The woman asked, “Are you living alone? Is any female living in the Ashram?”
Jaimini replied, “I am alone. But I am a perfect Brahmachari. No lust can affect me. I am
free from any kind of mental modification. You can stay there.”
The lady objected, “It is not right for a young virgin to stay with a Brahmachari alone at
night.”
Jaimini said, “O damsel! do not be afraid. I promise you of my perfect Brahmacharya.”Then she agreed and stayed in his Ashram at night. Jaimini slept outside and the lady was in
the room. At dead of night, Jaimini began to feel the influence of lust in his mind. A little sexual
craving arose. In the beginning he was absolutely pure. Then he knocked at the door and said, “Olady! the wind is blowing outside. I cannot bear the cold blasts. I wish to sleep inside.”
She opened the door. Jaimini was now sleeping inside. Again the sexual craving became a
little more intense and keen as he slept very close to the lady and heard the sound of her bangles.Then he arose and began to embrace her. Immediately Vyasa assumed his original form with hislong beard and said, “O my dear Jaimini! what about the strength of your Brahmacharya now?What did you say when I was lecturing on this subject?”
Jaimini lowered his head in utter shame and said, “Guruji, I am wrong. Kindly pardon me.”
Maya is powerful. Adam fell on account of one loose moment. Eve tempted him on account
of one desire. The forbidden fruit begins to ripen before the human eye in no time. A post will look
like an illustrious god and make you bow in utter submission before it. Beware of Maya and itsmeshes. The chains of gold can be cut asunder but not the silken meshes of Maya. A singleunguarded moment is sufficient to capsize the whole casket of pearls down into the dark abyss ofpassion and lust.
91KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Therefore, O dear aspirants! you will have to be very, very careful. During the period of
Sadhana avoid the company of women. You must never mix with young ladies, however strong you
might be. Maya works through undercurrents so stealthily that you may not be aware of your actualdownfall. Needless to say the same cautions apply to women in respect of their contact with men.
Keep the mind fully occupied in spiritual pursuits. Keep yourself at the farthest distance
from everything that would stir up your passions. Then only will you be safe.
Do not live with householders. Do not test your spiritual strength and purity while you are a
beginner on the path. Do not rush into evil association when you are a spiritual neophyte, just toshow that you have the courage to face sin and impurity. It will be a serious mistake. You will berunning into grave danger. You will have a quick downfall. A small fire can be very easilyextinguished by a heap of dust.
The mind has a great power of imitation. That is the reason why a spiritual aspirant is
prohibited from mixing with householders. His mind will try to imitate the minds of worldlings. Adownfall will eventually ensue.
Some foolish young aspirants do Sadhana for four or five years in the Himalayan caves, see
some dazzling lights during meditation, hear some sounds in the ears and then think that they arerealised souls. They enter the world quickly, preach, mix with householders freely and get ahopeless downfall rapidly. What you have gained in rigid Sadhana in twelve years will be lost intwelve seconds if you mix promiscuously with householders and if you do not take properprecautions. You should never come out to the plains till you attain the Self, till you become afull-blown Yogi or Jnani.
If an aspirant moves with rich people, with landlords and Rajahs, his mind will begin to
imitate their luxurious habits, and before long he will get an unconscious downfall. Certain badhabits will begin to creep into him unconsciously. And he will find it difficult to tear himself awayor remove these bad habits. After forty it is difficult to tear out old habits and establish new, healthyhabits.
An aspirant can live only for a short time in his native place if there is an urgent call. Yogic
rules and laws cannot permit him to stay there for a sufficiently long period, however suitable theplace may be and whatever be the degree of his dispassion. The force of impressions is tremendous.Unless all the impressions are thoroughly burnt through entry into the state of the pure NirvikalpaSamadhi, it is not safe for one to stay for a long time in one’s native place. He will still be in thedanger zone.
After seclusion for five years the aspirant should test his mental state by coming into the
world and mixing cautiously with worldly people. If there is no attraction for the sense-objects, hecan be quite sure that he has reached the third Jnana-Bhumika—a stage wherein the mind has beenthinned out like a slender thread.
92THE POWER OF PASSIONThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 32
REAL AUSTERITY
Those men who practise terrific austerities not enjoined by the scriptures, given to
vanity and egoism, impelled by the force of lust and attachment,
Senseless, torturing all the elements in the body and Me also who dwells in the body
within, know thou these to be of demoniacal resolves.
(XVII-5 & 6)
There are some who think that mortification of the body is the proper means of attaining the
goal of life. They do this in order to attract attention and get money for the gratification of the
senses. This is not real austerity. This is Tamasic austerity. Bodily torture will not bringemancipation. These people are not acquainted with even the first elements of the Shastras orscriptures. They mock at the religious practices of wise, elderly persons and jeer at learned men.They are puffed up with the vanity of their own greatness. They are extremely proud of their wealthand status in life. They perform unauthorised austerities. These persons do very severe austeritiesthat are contrary to the teachings of the scriptures. They do so on the strength of desire andattachment.
Some remain naked in winter. Some Sadhus stand on one leg, raising their arms above.
Some stand in water waist-deep and do Japa of their Mantra. Some stand in the hot sun. Some hangfrom a tree head downwards, with a fire lighted below. Some sleep and sit on a bed of sharp nails.These are all practices that develop endurance. They develop will-power.
Some perform the Panchagni austerity. They sit amidst four fires on the four sides, with the
blazing sun overhead as the fifth.
Some even take the lives of children and propitiate their Deity. Instead of killing their
egoism, they kill many innocent animals in the name of sacrifice. Whereas, in reality they kill theanimals only to satisfy their own palate. Most horrible indeed! They speak ill of the scriptures andwander about in the forest of infatuation or delusion. They follow the dictates of passion. Theyinflict pain on themselves and on others also. They practise severe austerities which cause pain tothemselves and to other living beings. Pitiable indeed is their lot. They are doomed for destruction.
Some make austerity the end and aim of their Sadhana. It is only a means. A little practice
will serve the purpose. One should be able to walk barefoot, and without an umbrella when it is hotor when it rains. One should be able to sleep on the bare ground without a pillow. Those who wish totake to the path of renunciation should practise these while they are still in the world.
Generally, aspirants say, “I have given up the use of the umbrella. I take only one meal a
day.” Their whole Sadhana consists in “giving up the shirt”, “giving up the sweater”, and “living onbread and dhal.” Their Sadhana consists in “giving up this and giving up that”.
93KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Real spiritual life does not involve any giving up or any taking up. There is no giving up or
taking up. The only thing is that you should not give leniency to the mind. If you are very hungry in
the morning, take one or two slices of bread and a cup of milk. Dispassion is a mental state. But youshould not give leniency to the mind. It will hurl you down. Always be watchful. Be eternallyvigilant.
Unnecessary torture of the body in the name of austerity is highly deplorable. This is a
demoniacal kind of austerity. It is the austerity of ignorant persons. This kind of austerity iscondemned by the Lord in the Gita.
The body is a moving temple of the Lord. It is an instrument for Self-realisation. You cannot
do any Sadhana if the body is not kept strong and healthy. The attachment to dispassion is as muchan evil as attachment to sensual objects. Give up this kind of egoistic attachment to dispassion. Thisegoism of a Sannyasin is more dangerous and inveterate than the egoism of worldly persons.
The egoism of dispassion is a deadly canker. It is difficult to get rid of this attachment as
long as there is the body-idea. The feeling that one is a great practitioner of austerity is a kind ofegoistic attachment to austerity and dispassion. The body of a Sannyasin, who has dedicated it tothe service of humanity, is public property. He has no claim on it because he ever denies itsexistence and tries to feel that he is the Self only. The public will take care of his body.
Extreme asceticism is not at all necessary for the attainment of perfection. What is wanted is
a strong mental dispassion born of strong discrimination. All bodies are not fit for the practice ofsevere austerities. The body will drop down if you tax it too much by way of rigid austerities. Do notspoil your health and body in the name of austerities. Have a strong, healthy body but have noattachment to it. Be prepared to give it up at any time for a noble cause.
The caretaker of a horse feeds it with proper nutrition when it is overworked, when it is
ailing. Then only will the horse be ready for further work. Even so, this body should be providedwith proper nutrition. Then only will it turn out good work. Then only will it regain its lost vitalityon account of overwork or ailment. Work will suffer if the body is not well attended to. When thebody grows old, it must be well protected against the cold and properly taken care of. If undesirableausterities are now practised it will give way soon. Consequently, the other shore of immortalityand fearlessness cannot be reached.
O Ram! neglect not this body. Society and Nature will extract and continue to extract as
much work as possible from those selfless workers who have dedicated their lives to the service ofhumanity. They will be yoked to service till the last breath leaves their bodies.
Lord Vishnu instructs the devoted Prahlada, “My dear Prahlada, enough of your austerity.
Take care of your body. Rise from your Samadhi. Serve people now. Disseminate Bhakti far andwide”.
Lord Buddha also tortured the body. He did severe austerities by giving up food. Yet he was
not able to attain the goal. One day he heard the following song being sung by a girl:
94REAL AUSTERITYThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Fair goes the dancing when the sitar is tuned,
Tune us the sitar neither low nor high,And we will dance away the hearts of men.The string o’stretched breaks and the music flies,The string o’erslack is dumb and the music dies,Tune us the sitar neither low nor high.
Lord Buddha then ate, adopted the middle path and eventually succeeded in achieving
Nirvana.
So we should go by the middle path always. The body is an instrument for the attainment of
Self-realisation. In this Kali Yuga, the Prana lives in the bones. So you should not torture the body.
Whatever is needed for the body you should have. You should not expose it to chill. God has givenus common sense. So you should practise the “Common sense Sadhana”. There is no harm in takinggood, healthy food. Every man has a different physical constitution. You should therefore usecommon sense in your Sadhana.
If you feel weak and cannot sit for a long period in your posture during meditation, you can
take some tonic or some fruit. You should have intense dispassion internally and at the same timefollow the middle path externally.
33
THE PULL OF THE SENSES
For the mind, which follows in the wake of the wandering senses, carries away his
discrimination, as the wind a boat on the waters.
(II-67)
The individual soul sits on the marvellous car of the mind, passes through the gateway of the
ear in the twinkling of an eye and enjoys the various kinds of music of the world. He holds the reinsof the nerves of sensation, enters the domain of touch through the portals of the skin and enjoys thediverse kinds of soft objects. He roams about in the hills of beautiful forms and enjoys them throughthe windows of his eyes. He enters into the cave of taste through the avenue of his tongue and enjoysdainties, palatable dishes and many refreshing beverages. He enters the forest of perfumes throughthe doors of his nose and enjoys the different kinds of smell to his heart’s content.
The five organs of perception are like the five wives of a Chinaman. Just as the wives drag
the Chinaman in different directions, so also the five senses drag the passionate Jiva in five differentdirections. The helpless Jiva is tossed about hither and thither and becomes restless and miserable.
While you walk along Mount Road in Madras, each sense tries its level best to get hold of its
objects of enjoyment and revelry. The senses revolt vehemently if you do not procure for them the
95KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book required objects. The tongue drags you to the coffee hotel or to Hotel de Angelis. The skin says,
“Let me go to the Bombay Saits and get a piece of China silk.” The ears say, “Let us have a
gramophone or a harmonium.” The nose says, “Let me have a bottle of Otto de Rose .” The mind,
which is at the bottom of these senses, instigates them. A tumultuous internal fight goes on among
the five organs of knowledge, each one trying to have a lion’s share of the enjoyment
The nose and the anus are sister organs. They are born of the same earth element, the nose
from the Sattwic portion and the anus from the Rajasic portion. These two senses are the leastmischievous. The olfactory sense and the olfactory nerve do not trouble one much. They can becontrolled very easily.
The tongue and the genitals are born of the water element, the former from the Sattwic
portion and the latter from the Rajasic. They are both sister organs. Eating strengthens thereproductive organ.
The eyes and the feet are of the fire element, the eyes from the Sattwic portion and the feet
from the Rajasic. They are sister organs. The eyes like to see sights. Their sisters, the feet, say, “Weare ready to take you to the fair at Allahabad. Be ready.”
The skin and the hands are born of the air element, the skin from the Sattwic portion and the
hands from the Rajasic. They are sister organs. The skin says, “I want silk and other smooth articlesfor my enjoyment.” Her sisters, the hands, say, “We can feel through our tactile corpuscles. Weshall get for you fine, soft silk. Do not be afraid, my dear sister!”
Speech and the ears are born of the same ether element, the ears from the Sattwic portion
and speech from the Rajasic. They are sister organs. They help each other in the economy of Nature.
The most mischievous and troublesome sense-organ is the generative organ. Then comes
the tongue. After it comes the organ of speech. The ears follow and after the ears, it is the eyes.
The control of the organ of taste is far more difficult than control of the genitals, because
you have been enjoying delicious articles of food even from your very birth. Lust manifests justbefore the age of eighteen. You indulge in sexual pleasure only for a short period in every birth. Butyou have to take food even during advanced senility. The control of the palate means control of allthe senses.
The tongue is like a double-edged sword. It is the most powerful sense-organ. If it is
controlled, all the other sense-organs can easily be controlled. The tongue is a friend of the organ ofgeneration. As soon as the stomach is filled with delicious food, the organ of reproduction getsexcited. The person then begins to entertain lustful thoughts. The tongue performs two kinds ofactivities, namely, eating and talking. Hence it is like a double-edged sword.
If you control the eyes, if you do not allow them to run towards beautiful forms, all the other
senses are not controlled. But if you fast and control the tongue by withdrawing all tasty foods, thenall the other senses are controlled, because it is the tongue that fattens all the other senses. If you
96THE PULL OF THE SENSESThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book control the tongue then all the other senses are automatically controlled. The tongue is the most
turbulent and powerful of all the senses.
Music, the cinema and sight-seeing are enjoyed in human births only. Ants and rats do not
enjoy a cinema show. The sense of sight is not as powerful as the tongue.
The organ of sight serves as a loving comrade to the organ of taste. The mind is at once
tickled at the sight of the yellow colour of a mango. The eyes see a beautiful mango and the differentdishes that are served at the table. At once the glosso-pharyngeal nerves are stimulated. You getgood appetite and relish the food. The food is rendered more palatable. A blind man may not have asgood a relish as a man with sharp sight.
The three organs—the ears, eyes and tongue—externalise the mind and make a man
altogether worldly. The eyes and ears are the avenues of sense-knowledge. Close the eyes. Shut theears either with balls of cotton, or with balls of cotton beaten with yellow bees’ wax, or with the twothumbs (Yoni Mudra). Now you have destroyed two-fifths of the world. Do not allow anything toenter the mind through these two doors of sense-knowledge.
The object of Sadhana is to internalise the mind by introspection and to realise the Truth
within. Control the three organs. Then you can bring the mind under discipline and prevent themental energy from flowing externally. These organs are the main causes of making the mindrestless. Control over them helps the purpose of concentrating the energy internally.
Use your discrimination always. The senses will tempt and deceive you. They are like
jugglers. Maya spreads her jugglery of infatuation through the mind and the senses. So be on thealert.
Practise control of the senses through dispassion and renunciation of desires. Happiness
comes through calmness of the senses, through calmness of the mind. Go to the bazaar with plentyof money in hand. Walk hither and thither for fifteen minutes. Look with greedy eyes at the varioussweets. But do not purchase anything. Return home. Even if dainties are served that day at home,reject them. Have a simple diet. By so doing you will be able to control the palate which is at theroot of all troubles. You will eventually control the mind also. You will develop will-power.
97KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 34
THE ART OF ABSTRACTION
When, like the tortoise which withdraws on all sides its limbs, he withdraws his senses
from the sense-object, then his wisdom is fixed.
(II-58)
The senses are objectified desires. The will to see is the eye. The will to hear is the ear. The
senses have two states—static and dynamic. When a desire begins to operate, the senses are put into
operation. This is the dynamic state. As soon as the desire is gratified, the senses shrink throughsatisfaction. This is the static or passive state.
The mind and the senses are one. The senses are prolongations of the mind. The sea is fed by
the rivers; it cannot exist without the rivers. Even so, the mind is fed by the senses and cannot existwithout them. If you have controlled the senses, you have already controlled the mind. The sensesare the mind.
The mind is a mass of senses. It is a higher power than the senses. It is a consolidated sense.
The senses are mind in manifestation. Just as a minister obeys the king, so also the five organs ofknowledge act in accordance with the dictates of the mind. The senses represent the backwaters.The desire in the mind to eat manifests as the tongue, teeth and stomach. The desire in the mind towalk manifests itself as legs and feet. If you can control the mind, you can control all the senses.
The mind is the commander-in-chief. The senses are the soldiers. They cannot do anything
without the co-operation of the mind. The senses cannot perform anything independently. If youcan disconnect the mind from the senses, there will be abstraction of the senses automatically.
The senses cannot do anything if the mind is not connected to them. When you are wholly
absorbed in the study of an interesting newspaper, you do not hear when your friend calls out toyou. You are not aware that the clock has struck five. It is the experience of everybody. The mindwas away at the time. It was then not connected to the sense of hearing. The eyes may be wide openbut if the mind is somewhere else one does not see anything that may be in front of one.
The practice of Pratyahara consists in the withdrawal of the senses from the particular
objects of sense. Pratyahara checks or stops the outgoing tendencies of the senses. It puts a break, asit were, on the senses. Then the senses get involved in the mind. When one is fully established inPratyahara, then supreme control of the senses comes in. In the practice of Pratyahara, the mind hasto be checked although the practice concerns the senses only.
When the senses give up the objects, they take on the form of the mind-stuff. They are
drawn into the mind. This is termed Pratyahara. When the senses are withdrawn from theirrespective objects, it is sense-Pratyahara. Mental Pratyahara takes place when the mind isdisconnected from the senses.
98THE ART OF ABSTRACTIONThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book When the eyes run towards objects of beauty, withdraw them and fix them at the Lotus Feet
of Lord Krishna. When the ears run to listen to worldly sounds and music, train them to hear the
Name “Narayana”. You will have to check the mind itself in the case of the other three senses,namely, that of smell, taste and feeling. You must give up perfumes, sugar, salt, chillies, tasty thingsand soft beds.
The discipline of the senses is a very important point. Watch every sense carefully and curb
it through suitable methods such as fasting, observance of silence, Tratak, celibacy, renunciation ofsense-objects, self-restraint and Pratyahara. The curbing of the senses means curbing the mind. Thesenses cannot do any independent work without the direct help of the mind. Celibacy checks thegenitals. The observance of silence controls the organ of speech. Tratak (gazing at a point) controlsthe eyes.
When you walk along in the street do not look hither and thither like a monkey. Look at your
toes and walk straight. Practise Tratak when you are at home. Always fix your eyes at one point.This also will help to control the eyes. Do not visit the cinema, dancing parties or any place wherethere are vulgar music and frolic. Sleep on a coarse mat. Give up soft mattresses. Do not useperfume. Keep a watch on every sense and put a check then and there if it has a tendency of goingastray. He who has disciplined his senses has a strong will and peace of mind. He can concentrateperfectly. He has immense inner strength. He gets success in life and also on the path of spirituality.No higher Sadhana is possible without the discipline of the senses.
In the practice of Pratyahara you will have to drag the outgoing senses again and again from
sensual objects and fix the mind on your point of meditation, just as the cart driver drags theimpetuous bulls and fixes them to the yoke. You must learn to drag the senses gently. Someaspirants draw them in vehemently. That is the reason why they experience a little headacheoccasionally.
You should practise withdrawal of the senses one by one. Deal with the most turbulent
sense first. Practise Pratyahara of that particular sense to start with. Then you can take up anotherorgan. If you try to manipulate all the senses at the same time, you will not gain success. The taskwill be an uphill one. You will feel quite exhausted.
One should be careful of reaction. If the aspirant is not careful, if his dispassion wanes, and
if he is not regular in his Sadhana, reaction sets in and the senses become more turbulent. Controlbecomes very difficult. The aspirant falls hopelessly.
Dispassion and renunciation help much in the practice of Pratyahara. If one succeeds in
Pratyahara, concentration comes by itself. Generally, people jump to the practice of concentrationwithout practising Pratyahara in the beginning. That is the reason why they fail in concentration.Pratyahara is very important. The senses are starved to death by the practice of Pratyahara. Theybecome lean and emaciated. Even if they come in close contact with sensual objects they cannot getexcited. They are like serpents whose fangs have been extracted. They cannot do any harm.
If you can consciously do Pratyahara at will, consciously attaching and detaching the mind
to and from the senses, you have really gained a great control over the mind. You can then check the
99KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book outgoing tendencies or outgoing forces of the mind at any time. Pratyahara is the stepping stone to
inner spiritual life. He who has succeeded in Pratyahara can concentrate his mind quite readily for avery long time. He can practise concentration in any place, even in a congested city. The moment hesits for meditation, his senses will get withdrawn. He will not be disturbed by external sounds.Concentration and meditation come easily if Pratyahara is perfect. An aspirant has to struggle hardto have mastery in Pratyahara. Perfect dispassion is indispensable for success in Pratyahara. Youcan succeed after strenuous and incessant struggle for some years.
During the period of Sadhana, do not mix much. Do not talk much. Do not walk much. Do
not eat much. Do not sleep much. Observe the five “do nots”. Mixing much will cause greatdisturbance in the mind. Talking much will cause distraction. Walking much will cause exhaustionand weakness. Eating much will induce laziness and drowsiness.
If you have the reins of the horses under your control, you can have a safe journey. The
senses are the horses. If you have them under your control, you can have a safe journey to the goalof liberation. The senses cannot do anything without the help of the mind, their master andcommander. The control of the senses means control of the mind only. Control of thoughts leads tocontrol of the mind and the senses also. It leads to the attainment of infinite bliss and eternal life.The control of thought is indispensable. It is a great desideratum for all.
The Yogic student should practise Pratyahara after getting some success in the practice of
Yama, Niyama, Asana and Pratyahara. Pratyahara follows automatically the practice ofPranayama. When the life-force is controlled by regulation or restraint of the breath, the senses getthinned out. They are starved to death. They get emaciated. They cannot hiss now when they comeinto contact with their objects.
Pratyahara is a trying discipline indeed. It is disgusting in the beginning but later on it
becomes very interesting. You will feel inner strength. It demands considerable patience andperseverance. It will give you tremendous power. You will develop immense will-power. Duringthe course of the practice the senses will run again and again like wild bulls towards objects. Youwill have to withdraw them repeatedly and fix the mind on the point of meditation. That Yogi whois well established in Pratyahara can meditate quite calmly even in the battlefield wheremachine-guns roar in a continuous stream.
The wife of sage Tiruvalluvar had remarkable success in the practice of Pratyahara. She
carried on her head a pot filled to the brim with water and moved amidst a big crowd. She did notallow a drop of water to spill. He who is proficient in Pratyahara can enter into deep sleep themoment he lies down on his bed. Napoleon could do this as he was very proficient in Pratyahara.
Sukadev had wonderful Pratyahara. He was tested by Raja Janaka in the latter’s palace.
Raja Janaka arranged for music and dancing parties all around his palace to distract the attention ofSukadev. There were various kinds of shows and entertainments. Sukadev was requested to carry inhis hand a cup of milk filled to the very brim and go round the palace three times without allowingeven a drop to fall to the ground. Sukadev had complete success in his attempt as he was fullyestablished in Pratyahara. Nothing could distract his mind.
100THE ART OF ABSTRACTIONThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Success in Pratyahara depends upon the strength of past Yogic impressions which the
student possesses. He who has diligently practised Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama and
Pratyahara in his previous births to some extent, will have success in Pratyahara within a short timein this birth. A beginner who attempts to practise Yoga for the first time in this birth, who has noprevious Samskaras of past births to his credit, may take quite a long time to achieve some definiteand positive success in Pratyahara. One can feel from his own experiences and degree of success inhis Yoga practice whether he is a neophyte or an accomplished Yogi.
35
THE CONQUEST OF RAGA-DWESHA
Attachment and aversion for the objects of the senses abide in the senses; Let none
come under their sway, for they are his foes.
(III-34)
Raga is liking, attraction, love, attachment. Dwesha is dislike, repulsion, hatred.
Raga-Dwesha are the two mental modifications that arise from the mind. They are born ofignorance or nescience. They are the products of ignorance. This mysterious worldly existence iskept up by Raga-Dwesha. These two currents are the two strong weapons of Maya, the illusorypower of the Lord. The individual soul is tied to this world by this strong rope of Raga-Dwesha.
Raga-Dwesha have four states: the expanded state, the hidden state, the attenuated state and
the burnt state.
The expanded state and the hidden state are present in the worldly-minded persons.
Raga-Dwesha have their full vigour or virility in the expanded state in worldly persons. They doconsiderable harm. They overwhelm the persons. People become mere victims or preys to the twocurrents. They have not the least control over them.
In the hidden state, attraction and repulsion are not seen. When you quarrel with your wife,
your affection is temporarily hidden. She smiles and laughs and the affection re-manifests.Aspirants perform Sadhana. They develop dispassion and cosmic love gradually. In them the twocurrents get thinned out. They cannot do any havoc. They may raise their heads slowly when theaspirants come into contact with pleasant objects but they are struck down by the strong rod ofdiscrimination and the sword of enquiry.
In a Jivanmukta or fully developed Yogi, attraction and repulsion are burnt in toto through
Nirvikalpa Samadhi.
Go anywhere in the world, you will find Raga-Dwesha. Even in Mount Everest or Gangotri
in the Himalayas you will find the two currents, because man carries with him his desires wherever
101KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book he goes. Human nature is the same in all places. But if you want to evolve on the spiritual path you
will have to ignore these currents and create your own atmosphere around yourself.
You will find the play of the two currents of attraction and repulsion even among the lower
creatures, among plants, elements and planets. There is repulsion between the sun and Saturn,between the sun and Uranus. The friendship or attraction or affinity between the sun and Mars isvery strong. There is strong sympathy between Saturn and Venus. Venus and Saturn are inimicaltowards their master, the sun.
Like attracts like. A songster joins other songsters, a poet joins other poets, a doctor other
doctors, a rogue other rogues, a statesman other statesmen, a saint other saints.
There is an intimate connection between Raga-Dwesha, desires and the three Gunas.
Raga-Dwesha themselves are impure desires that emanate from the bed of impressions of Rajas andTamas. Desires, impressions, Gunas and Raga-Dwesha are the products of Maya’s jugglery. Onething assumes various forms. One thing changes its colour like a chameleon. One thing changes itsform like a ghost. Attraction becomes a desire, a desire becomes an impression, and an impressionin the mind becomes a Guna. The play is very mysterious. It is very difficult, nay, well-nighimpossible to detect the workings of Maya. Only the Lord, the indweller, the inner ruler, knows theways of Maya, His inscrutable Shakti. If you destroy ignorance, then all the links of the chain ofignorance are broken at once, at one stroke.
Wherever there is repulsion, there you will find anger. Anger is a long-standing associate of
repulsion. Fear is an old friend of attraction. Wherever there is attraction, there you will find fear.Man is afraid of losing the objects of his possession as he is intensely attached to them. Whereverthere is pleasure, there you will find attraction. Wherever there is pain, there you will find hatred.
You love sweetmeats or mangoes because you derive pleasure from them. So you are
attached to them. You hate a scorpion because it gives you pain.
Raga-Dwesha is the real Karma. Trees, rivers and other objects do not constitute the world.
Raga-Dwesha is the real world. There is no world for that sage who has neither attraction norrepulsion. The mind runs into the same grooves cut by Raga-Dwesha. As soon as you get up frombed, the two currents begin their play. You take tea, put on your suit and hat and begin to do thesame actions of eating, drinking and working again and again. You are a mere toy in the hands ofRaga-Dwesha. But those who practise introspection, self-analysis and meditation rise above thetwo currents and attain eternal bliss and immortality. Through attraction you love a man or awoman, and you favour some. Through repulsion you hate a man or a woman, and you injureothers. Thus the worldly existence has started now. Through Raga-Dwesha you perform virtuousand vicious actions. You reap a harvest of pleasure for the good actions, and pain for the wickeddeeds. You are caught up in the midst of births and deaths. This six-spoked wheel of Raga-Dwesha,virtue and vice, pleasure and pain, is revolving from eternity. Only a Yogi or a sage can stop thiswheel through meditation and worship.
The tree of Raga-Dwesha is deep-rooted. It ramifies in all directions. It has branches on all
sides. The mind clings tenaciously to objects. If you have attraction for someone, all your family
102THE CONQUEST OF RAGA-DWESHAThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book members also like the person. If you dislike the same person for some reason or the other, then all
your family members dislike him without any cause. Sometimes you dislike a person without anycause or reason whatsoever. There is hatred among family members, among clans, among thedifferent cults, creeds and religionists, among nations, among people of different schools ofphilosophy. You may be attached to a man or a woman, a cat or a dog, a stick or a cloth, a house or atown.
Raga-Dwesha—the affection and aversion for the objects of the senses—abide in the
senses. They are obstructions on the path of spirituality. Do not come under the domination of thesetwo currents. Crush them or powder them through the method of substituting the opposite qualitiesof Raja Yogins. Develop the opposite virtues of dispassion and cosmic love. Dispassion will crushattraction; cosmic love will crush repulsion. If you have inner spiritual strength and a strong will,extract Raga-Dwesha altogether through the knowledge of Brahman, just as you extract the teethwith the forceps.
Egoism is the commander. Raga-Dwesha, pride, anger and hypocrisy are his constant
attendants or the soldiers of the internal army. If you kill egoism—the commander—the soldierswill at once make an ungrudging, unconditional surrender.
From ignorance emanates non-discrimination. From non-discrimination originates egoism.
From egoism emanates Raga-Dwesha. From Raga-Dwesha comes Karma. From Karma comes thebody. From the body comes misery. This is the chain of bondage or misery with seven links.
If you do not want misery, do not take up a body. If you do not want a body, do not incur
Karma. If you do not want to incur Karma, give up Raga-Dwesha. If you want to give upRaga-Dwesha, give up egoism. If you want to give up egoism, give up non-discrimination. If youwant to give up non-discrimination, give up ignorance. O Rama! if you do not want ignorance, getknowledge of Brahman.
May you be free from Raga-Dwesha, your real enemies of peace, devotion and knowledge.
May you annihilate these enemies through the sword of knowledge! May you shine as a Jivanmuktaor liberated sage in this very life itself!
103KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 36
THE PURE & IMPURE MINDS
Let a man lift himself by his own Self alone, let him not lower himself; for this Self
alone is the friend of oneself and this self alone is the enemy of oneself.
The Self is the friend of the self for him who has conquered himself by the Self; but to
the unconquered self, this self stands in the position of an enemy like the external foe.
(VI-5 & 6)
The Sattwic mind or pure mind, and the impure mind or the instinctive mind, as it is called,
are the two kinds of minds according to Upanishadic teaching. There is the lower mind filled with
passion. There is the higher mind filled with purity. There are thus two minds. You will have tomake them into one—into the Sattwic mind only—if you want to meditate successfully. It isthrough the higher or Sattwic mind that you will have to control the lower or instinctive mind ofpassion and emotion.
There are two kinds of intellects—the worldly intellect and the pure intellect. There are two
kinds of egoism, namely, pure egoism which identifies itself with Brahman, and the impure egoism,which identifies itself with the body. There are two kinds of thoughts—pure thought and impurethought. The pure thought pertains to God and the impure thought pertains to the body and theworld.
The impure mind creates impure thought, impure intellect and impure egoism. All these
three form a vicious circle. The three work in co-operation. The seed of the mind is egoism. Themind is merely a bundle of thoughts. Of all thoughts, the “I”-thought is the root. It is also the firstthought that emanated from the mind. Therefore, the mind is only the thought “I”. The intellect isthe basis of egoism. It is the intellect that forces you to identify yourself with the physical body. It isthe intellect that creates difference or the idea of many in the world.
A Sattwic mind likes solitude, silence, simple living, high thinking, study of spiritual books,
philosophical discussions, concentration of the mind, and the company of Sadhus, Mahatmas andSannyasins. A stainless mind can be judged through one’s speech, face and eyes. Through theseexpressions, the opinion can be formed whether a person has a stainless mind or not. Higher desires,noble aspirations, lofty ideals, true religious feeling, mercy, sympathy, pure unselfish love,devotion, enquiry into the nature of the Atman, inspiration, genius—all these come from the higher,pure, Sattwic mind. The pure mind is Brahman Itself. It is an embodiment of purity itself.
A Rajasic mind likes crowded cities, much conversation, luxurious life, low thinking, the
company of the opposite sex, the study of romantic novels, eating dainty dishes, and selfishactivities. The instinctive mind is the lower, impure mind of passion and desire. The vast majorityof persons have this instinctive mind only. Even the so-called civilised and educated persons live onthe plane of the instinctive mind. Their senses are very sharp and acute and they run after more
104THE PURE & IMPURE MINDSThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book refined things for their sense gratification. They identify themselves with the physical body and the
senses. They have no idea of the subtle Atman which is entirely distinct from the body and thesenses. Their ‘I’ is the physical, gross body only though they know that there is a mind.
Sensual enjoyment brings about many diseases and destroys the power of discrimination. It
makes the mind impure. Therefore, shun sensual enjoyments completely. Try to realise the Selfwithin, wherein lies eternal bliss and immortality.
A sharp, subtle, one-pointed, Sattwic mind is needed for enquiry into the nature of the
Atman and for the study of the Upanishads. A gross mind and worldly intellect with selfishness and
lust is absolutely unfit for enquiry into the Self and philosophical ratiocination. Selfishness cloudsunderstanding. Selfishness is the bane of life. The mind of a worldling is ever ready to absorbsexual thoughts. It cannot imbibe subtle, philosophical ideas. It is callous and cannot vibrateproperly to take in philosophical ideas. You can drive a nail into clay but not in stone. The mind hasto be purified by selfless service, Japa, Pranayama and various other spiritual practices.
Brahman is to be seen by the mind. This is the utterance of the Srutis . Here, “mind” means
the pure mind. Brahman can only be seen by a mind which is equipped with the four means ofsalvation, which has been rendered subtle and pure through the practice of calmness, tranquillity,self-restraint and religious observances, which is equipped with the sacred instructions of aqualified Guru, and which practises hearing, reflection and contemplation. Should the pure mindconcentrate itself for some time through a study of the Jnana Shastras, association with the wise and
an uninterrupted practice of meditation, then in such a mind will dawn a vision in which there willbe a direct cognition of the one Reality.
The enemy of the Atman is the impure mind, which is replete with excessive delusion and a
host of thoughts. This mischievous and powerful imp of the lower mind is the generator of all painand fear and the destroyer of all noble, spiritual wealth. Your real enemy is this impure mind only,which is full of delusion, cravings, desires and a host of other impurities. Lest this enemy shouldspoil you in diverse ways through the many “enjoyments” and “pleasures” in this world, slay it inthe hope of getting eternal bliss and spiritual illumination. Destroy the lower mind with the help ofthe higher mind. Destroy your instinctive mind through discrimination and with the help of yourhigher, Sattwic mind. Then and then alone will you get eternal, infinite peace and the bliss of theAtman. Then alone will you become a liberated sage.
Both the Sattwic mind and the Rajasic mind move in diametrically opposite directions. The
Sattwic mind unifies. The instinctive mind separates and divides. The voice of the instinctive mindmisleads you. Purify the mind and hear the voice of conscience or the voice of the Sattwic mind.You have to develop the Sattwic part of the mind by annihilating the lower, impure, instinctivemind. The lower mind should be destroyed by the higher mind. Then only will you have eternalpeace and happiness. Then alone will you attain liberation and have supreme knowledge andperennial bliss. Slay the impure mind through enquiry and meditation on Om, and rest in your ownessential divine nature, in the state of Satchidananda.
As one iron shapes another, so also the pure mind of a person who makes effort on the path
of virtue, should correct and mould his impure mind. The mind is unfailingly rendered pure through
105KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book true, virtuous actions and constant association with the wise. Speaking the truth and the practice of
compassion are very great purifiers of the mind. All lofty aspirations, all-embracing love and suchother tendencies go a long way in increasing the Sattwic material of the mind. The higher mind isthus gradually developed and strengthened.
Sacrifice, gift, compassion, study of the Vedas and speaking the truth—these five are
purifying in their effect. The sixth is penance well practised. The last one is highly purifying.Pilgrimage to sacred places is also purifying. You come in contact with holy persons there. You canhave good Satsang.
Charity, Japa, selfless service, sacrifice, Brahmacharya, tranquillity, self-restraint, study of
the scriptures, austerities, service of saints—all these tend to purify the mind. There will beunalloyed bliss in the mind thus purified.
A Mantra purifies the mind. The mere repetition of a Mantra, parrot-like, has very little
effect. It does have some benefit. It must be repeated with feeling. Then it produces wonderfuleffects. The Mantra, unless it is inspired by the powerful will-force of one’s own mind, cannotproduce much effect.
Study of philosophical works, right thought, the exercise of good and noble emotions,
prayers and beneficent endeavours and, above all, regular and intense meditation are the means ofimproving the mind. These will bring about the rapid evolution of the mind. When the mind is thuspurified, a hole is formed in the centre through which purity, knowledge and light flow fromBrahman.
A goldsmith converts ten carat gold into fifteen carat by adding acids and smelting it several
times in the crucible. Even so, you will have to purify your sensuous mind through concentrationand reflection on the words of your spiritual preceptor and on the Upanishadic sentences. You willhave to cleanse the mind through meditation, Japa and such other spiritual practices.
It takes a long time to purify the yellow oxide of arsenic. It has to be soaked in cow’s urine
for seven days, in lime water for ten days and in milk for a further seven days. Then it has to be burntout a hundred and eight times before a proper oxide is obtained. Even so, it takes an extremely longtime to effect purity of mind. Severe austerity is needed.
Arsenic, when purified and administered in proper doses, is a blessing. It removes many
diseases. It improves the blood. But when not purified properly or given in overdoses, the samearsenic brings about many ill effects. Even so, when the mind is rendered pure, it leads to liberation;when it is impure, it leads to bondage.
Mind is the cause of bondage and liberation. Mind is everything. It is your true friend as
well as your bitter enemy. The impure mind is your enemy. It causes various sorts of attachments. Itis filled with numerous base desires and appetites. The higher mind is a rare friend and benefactor,because it imparts true counsel in the way of attaining the supreme goal of life. The higher mindbecomes your guiding Guru. Hear its sweet, small voice and follow its instructions. The voice of thepure mind is the voice of God. It is an infallible voice.
106THE PURE & IMPURE MINDSThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book There is no other vessel on this earth to enable you to wade through the ocean of worldly
existence than the mastery of the lower instinctive mind. The sovereign specific presented by the
wise sages for the eradication of the mind’s disease can be had easily through the mind alone.Intelligent persons cleanse a dirty cloth with the dirty earth only. A murderous fire missile iscounteracted by the water missile. The venom of serpent-bite is removed by its antidote of an ediblepoison. So also is the case with the Jiva. Having developed discrimination, destroy the delusions ofthe heterogeneous mind through the one-pointed mind, like an iron severing another iron.
When all the impurities of the mind are completely removed, the instinctive mind dies
away; only the Sattwic mind or the higher mind remains. A pure mind is Brahman Itself. Just ascamphor in the presence of fire is turned into fire and absorbed in it when burnt, so also the mind,when purified, becomes of the nature of Brahman. Just as water, when a lump of salt is placed in it,becomes salty, so also the mind when purified in the presence of Brahman, becomes of the nature ofBrahman.
Conquer the lower mind through the higher mind. Lord Krishna says, “Let a man lift
himself by his own Self alone”. There is no virtue greater than self-reliance. The possession of thisimportant quality is a sine qua non for all aspirants who search after Truth. Gurus and teachers only
show the spiritual path, remove doubts and give some inspiration. You are your own redeemer. Youare your own saviour. Remember this point well. You have to tread the spiritual path yourself. Youhave to place each step yourself on the spiritual path. It is simply preposterous to think that yourGuru will do the Sadhana for you. A hungry and thirsty man will have to eat and drink for himself.
Lord Buddha relied on his own self only. He practised severe austerity for a period for six
years in the Uruvela forest. Lord Jesus did severe Sadhana during the missing period of his life. It ishighly lamentable indeed to see that even intelligent persons are labouring under greatmisapprehension and delusion and thereby wasting their precious lives owing to false hopes. Theyare thinking in vain that they will get a spiritual pill from their Masters and get immediateliberation, without undergoing any discipline or course of silent meditation. What a queer, foolishidea they are entertaining! It is highly deplorable indeed!
The Great Master, the living Master of masters, the source of the world, of Jivas and of
everything is ever shining in the chambers of your heart. He is very close to you. He is sitting withoutstretched hands to lift you up and embrace you with His sweet love. Rely on Him alone.Surrender to Him with perfect trust and confidence in His Divine Grace. Identify yourself with boldand clear understanding with that eternal, living Indweller of your heart. Then alone will you attaineternal peace, infinite bliss, supreme satisfaction and immortality. Then alone will you be entirelyfree from all weaknesses and defects.
Glory, glory to those who have reached this highest state by relying on their Great Master
within, the Indweller of our hearts!
107KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 37
THE TAMING OF THE MIND
Abandoning without reserve all desires born of imagination, and completely
restraining the whole group of senses by the mind from all sides,
Little by little Let him attain quietude by the intellect held in firmness; having got the
mind established in the Self, let him not think of anything.
From whatever cause the restless and unsteady mind wanders away, from that let him
restrain it and bring it under the control of the Self alone.
(VI-24, 25 & 26)
One of the most important habits of the mind is the wandering habit. It cannot stick to one
point. It is like the wind.
If you carefully watch the wanderings of the mind you will discover that there is an intimate
connection from one point to another though the mind wanders wildly about like an unchained
monkey. The law of association operates always, though the links are broken. The mind may thinkof a book, then of the bookstall from where it was purchased, then of the friend met at the railwaystation while purchasing it, then of the railways and its directors who live in London.
The thought of London may bring in the idea of skating. From skating it may jump to the
Alps. It may think of pine trees, health hospitals and open-air treatment. The thought of a pine treewill bring in the remembrance of Almora in India, and its vicinity where pine trees grow. Thethought of Almora will bring in the thought of Swami Vivekananda who founded the AdwaitaAshram at Mayavati, near Almora. The mind may then entertain some divine ideas of concentrationand meditation and of Adwaita Brahman. Then suddenly it may drop into sensual grooves. It maythink of the prostitutes in Almora. It will entertain lustful thoughts.
All these will take place within the twinkling of an eye. The mind works and moves with
such tremendous speed that it is impossible to imagine. It catches one object and fabricates one ideaand, through association, leaves this object and this idea and jumps to another object and anotheridea. There is a sort of concentration all throughout its wanderings though the concentration is not acontinuous one.
When the thought runs in one definite groove continuously and on one subject alone, like
the flow of oil from one vessel to another, then it is concentration. The aspirant should withdraw hismind whenever it runs outside and put it in the same groove, in the same line of thought, on onesubject and on one idea. This is spiritual Sadhana. This is Yoga practice. This is concentration andmeditation. This will result in Samadhi or the Superconscious State, the fourth dimension.
108THE TAMING OF THE MINDThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Sri Krishna describes in unambiguous terms the ways to check the wandering habits of the
mind. The destruction of desires and control of the senses are the essential steps for the control of
the mind. It is desire that makes the mind restless. The senses run after objects and the mind alsofollows the senses just as a dog follows its master. The rays of the mind get scattered in sensualobjects. All the mental rays are dissipated in the acquisition, possession and enjoyment of sensualobjects. In this way, man runs after the five kinds of sensual pleasures and has no rest even for asecond. The mind runs in the sensual grooves in company with the five organs of knowledge andthis little Jiva.
Therefore, if you want to check this wandering mind, you will have to renounce all sorts of
desires and control the senses first. Then alone will you be successful in the practice ofconcentration, meditation, will-culture, memory-culture and thought-culture.
I have come across several educated people during the course of my lecture tour of the
United Provinces, Punjab, Kashmir and Andhra Desa. They asked me, “Dear Swamiji, how toconcentrate and meditate? We have been practising meditation for the last twelve years, yet wehave not found any improvement.” The obvious reason is that they are not doing meditation in theright scientific manner. They have not purified themselves. They have not renounced all the desiresof this world. They have not disciplined their minds. Without having all this preliminary trainingand discipline, they are trying to achieve the impossible, namely, concentration. How can this bepossible? It is something like trying to tie an infuriated elephant with a slender piece of silkenthread.
Mark carefully the words of Sri Krishna: “Abandoning without reserve all desires”. Most of
the aspirants keep some desires for their satisfaction. These desires lurk in the mind. Householderswho practise concentration cannot leave some of their desires. They keep them for their secretgratification. Hence energy leaks and they do not get any success. They rise up five steps andsuddenly fall from the spiritual ladder. Perfect dispassion is necessary for checking the wanderingnature of the mind. The senses should be curbed “from all sides”.
Mark the words: “from all sides”. The control of one sense alone will not do. All the senses
should be controlled from every side. This is also another vital point. As the practice is difficult andtedious you should not be discouraged. You will have to wait patiently for the results. Some peopledo the practice by fits and starts. They practise concentration for six hours daily for three months.When they see that they have not obtained any tangible results in the shape of psychic powers, theygive up the practice. This is very bad. Hence Sri Krishna says: “Little by little do the practice and befirm in it.”
Practice consists in bringing the mind again and again back to the point and fixing or
concentrating it on the point or Lakshya. Concentration means to converge the rays of the mind atone point. When the wandering mind becomes one-pointed, that state is called Ekagrata. This issingle-mindedness.
The subject of concentration is disgusting and tiring for the neophyte; but it is the most
interesting and beneficial science in the world. When one advances in concentration, when onetakes real interest in it, when one has realised some benefits, one cannot leave the practice. Such a
109KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book practitioner cannot remain for a day without concentration. He becomes restless when he fails to
have the practice. Concentration brings supreme joy, inner spiritual strength, unalloyed felicity andinfinite, eternal peace. Concentration brings profound knowledge and deep inner sight, intuitionand communion with God. It is the most wonderful science in the three worlds. I cannot adequatelydescribe its marvellous benefits.
Concentration on a chair really means getting complete, detailed knowledge of the chair, its
different parts, the particular wood out of which it is manufactured, such as rosewood, itsworkmanship or finish, its durability, its cost price, the degree of comfort it gives to the back andarms, whether the parts can be detached and fixed again, whether it is manufactured on modernlines and made bug-proof, what sort of polish or varnish is used to make it durable, and so on. Whenyou concentrate on the chair, ideas like these occupy the mind. The mind generally wanders wildlyat random. When it thinks of one object, in a second it leaves this object and runs like a monkey toanother, then to a third one and so on. It cannot stick to one point.
The vital point in concentration is to bring the mind to the same point or object again and
again by limiting its movements to a small circle in the beginning. That is the main aim. A time willcome when the mind will stick to one point alone. This is the fruit of your constant and protractedSadhana. The joy will now be indescribable.
When you meditate on a chair, bring all the thoughts connected with the chair and dwell on
these ideas. Do not allow any other thought connected with another object to enter the mind. Thereshould be one line of thought. There should be one continuity of thought, like the steady flow of oilfrom one vessel to another, like the continuous sound of a church bell. There may be several ideasconnected with one subject. This does not matter. You must reduce the number of ideas and come toone idea of one subject. When this idea also dies, you get entry into the state of Samadhi. Whenthere is one idea, it is called Savikalpa Samadhi, which is a lower stage. When this one idea alsodies out the mind becomes a blank or void. There is mental vacuity. This is the stage ofthoughtlessness mentioned by Patanjali Maharshi in his Raja Yoga philosophy. You will have torise above this blank modification and identify yourself fully with the Supreme Brahman, the silentwitness of the mind, who gives power and light to this mind. Then and then alone can you reach thehighest goal of life.
Back to the point. When you concentrate on a chair, do not allow any other thought of
different objects to enter the mind. Again and again bring the mind to the object, which is the chair.When you meditate on a rose, think of the rose and the rose alone. When you think of a book, thinkof all the ideas connected with the book and nothing outside of it. When you think of a mountain orthe ocean, think of the mountain and ocean alone. Exhaust all matters connected with the subject onhand. You can take any subject that is pleasing to the mind. Slowly you can take up any subject thatis not pleasing to the mind by creating interest in it again and again.
You should always remember the maxim: “One thing at a time and that done well is a very
good rule as many can tell”. When you take up any work, apply your whole heart, full mind and soulto it. Do it with perfect concentration. What another can do in six hours, you can turn out within halfan hour, smoothly and in a methodical and orderly manner. This is Yogic activity. You will now betaken for an accomplished Yogi.
110THE TAMING OF THE MINDThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Even when you study, study the subject with perfect concentration. Do not allow the mind
to wander. You must shut out all external sounds. Fix the gaze on one point. Do not allow the eyes
to wander. When you study a subject, do not think of coffee or sweetmeats or your friend. Suchmust be the nature of your concentration. It will come after some steady and constant endeavour. Benot troubled. Be not discouraged. There will be some delay. Wait coolly and patiently. Rome wasnot built in a day. It is all a question of time. Do not discontinue the practice even for a day, evenwhen you are sick. In your failure lies the secret of your success, and in your weakness lies thesecret of your strength. Plod on. Push on. Gird up your loins. Nil desperandum. Be bold. March on
courageously. Be cheerful. A brilliant future is awaiting you. Practise. Feel. Rejoice. Become aYogi or a world figure. I can make you one. Follow me. Be sincere and earnest. Rise up. Awake.Thy light has come. O dear children of light and immortality! Brahmamuhurta is dawning now. It is3.30 a.m. This is the best time to practise concentration on the Atman and to catch hold of the mind.Sit in Virasana and do rigorous practice now.
May success and divine glory attend on thee! I shall take leave of you now. Melt the bubble
mind in Brahman, the ocean of knowledge, and enjoy supreme bliss.
38
EXTINCTION OF THOUGHTS IS YOGA
When a man is not attached to sense-objects or to actions, having renounced all
thoughts, then he is said to have attained to Yoga .
(VI-4)
The world is merely an idea or thought. Just as a seed begins to germinate at its proper time
and place, so also the seer appears as the visible manifestation through the thought of the mind, thevisible being no other than the seer itself. When the mind ceases to think, the world vanishes andthere is bliss indescribable. When the mind begins to think, immediately the world reappears andthere is much suffering.
This universe is nothing but a mode of the mind, self-evolved from Brahman, the cause of
the universe. All the universes, which appear only through the mind, are no other than its modes.Subjectively the mind is Consciousness and objectively it is this universe. Hence, this all-pervadingworld is nothing but Consciousness Itself.
This ever-restless mind, having come into existence out of the ineffable Brahman, creates
the world according to its own thoughts. This legerdemain of the universe springs out of the mind’sthought. It is through the thought in the mind that the universe appears to be, and this thought has tobe given up by you if you wish to soar to the one Reality beyond the universe. With the growth of apaltry thought there arises the universe; with the extinction of the former, the latter also disappears.With the annihilation of thought, all concept of difference between the seer and the seen vanish, and
111KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book then the Reality begins to shine uninterrupted. Then the shadow of the whole universe, both
movable and immovable, is found in It in a non-dual state.
When thought increases prodigiously, it is in no way beneficial. It is for evil only. The cause
of bondage is thought. It is the thought and desire which you generate that enmesh you as in a net.You become subject to bondage through your own thought and desire, like a silkworm in itscocoon. The thought in the mind is itself pain. Its absence is Brahmic bliss. Thought aloneconstitutes this worldly existence; its destruction leads to liberation.
Mark how one thought expands into many in a short time. Suppose you get the thought that
you should organise a tea party for your friends. One thought of tea invites instantaneously thethoughts of sugar, milk, teacups, tables, chairs, napkins, spoons, sweetmeats, salted preparationsand so on. So, this world is nothing but the expansion of thought. There is no such thing as a worldindependent and apart from thought. The expansion of thought towards objects is bondage. Therenunciation of thought is liberation. The mind is strung with countless thoughts, like so manybeads. If the string be cut to pieces, then you can infer what may happen to the illusory thoughtswhich are strung on the mind.
You must be very watchful and nip the thoughts in the bud. Then only will you be really
happy. The mind plays tricks. You must understand its nature, ways and habits. Then only can youcontrol it very easily.
The ideas of differentiating this person from that, this object from that, pertain to the mind
only. Put an end to the mind with the sword of non-thought. Kill the soldier-thoughts one by onewhen they emerge out of the fort of the mind. Eventually, you can get hold of the fortress of themind. If you can bring about the extinction of all sorts of imagination and thought, like stormy galesdispersing thick clouds, the mind will get absorbed in its source—in Absolute Consciousness. Thenyou will be free from all sorts of tribulations, worries and miseries. Then only will you enjoyperennial happiness and possess the wealth of liberation.
The mind is Maya. If it runs towards sensual objects wildly, Maya takes a stronghold of the
man. Maya havocs through the mind. This lower impulsive mind drags you down into all kinds ofpetty sensual enjoyments and deludes you in a variety of ways. Maya, through her illusive power,raises millions of thoughts in the mind. Hence the Jiva becomes a prey to such thoughts.
This lower mind cannot approach those who have a strong power of discrimination between
the Real and the unreal. Maya is very easy to be detected and the Self can be easily realised by thosewho possess discrimination and strong determination. Through the power of the will anddiscrimination the mind can be controlled.
Slay the lower mind which is the enemy of the Atman. Do this with the help of the higher
and Sattwic mind. Use your discrimination, pure reason and spirit of enquiry constantly whenobjects trouble you and try to delude you. Again and again exercise your reason, till you areestablished in the higher divine knowledge. The power of ignorance is great indeed.
112EXTINCTION OF THOUGHTS IS YOGAThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Renounce desires. Renounce the thoughts of objects. Cultivate dispassion. Give up this
little, false “I”. All the thoughts encircle and envelop this “I”. Do not pay much attention to the
needs of the body. Think of the body and its wants as little as possible. This will enable you to thinkmore of God.
Have no thoughts. The fluctuating mind will then die by itself. It will melt in Brahman.
Then you will have the beatific vision of Brahman. When the mind dies, then “I”, “you” and “this”,time, space and Jiva all dwindle into nothing. The idea of inside and outside will also vanishcompletely. There will be only a single experience of the one indivisible and all-full Brahman. Alldoubts and delusions will disappear through knowledge.
You may perform austerities for myriads of years; you may be able to travel at once through
the three worlds; but you will not be able to reach the stainless shore of liberation except through thefirm path of annihilation of thoughts. Therefore, endeavour to destroy this thought-process andattain thereby the Brahmic bliss which is devoid of heterogeneity and pain.
It is only thought destroyed beyond resurrection that constitutes the immaculate Brahmic
seat. Why can you not contemplate silently and secretly in your heart upon the destruction of thisthought-process? Then it will so betide that even the throne of an emperor, who sways his sceptreover the whole earth, will be regarded by you as but a paltry bauble.
Remain without thoughts and desires. Divest yourself of all thoughts. This is the state of
Brahma Nishtha—establishment in Brahman. Strive to attain this state. You will then enjoy perfectpeace and joy.
The mind can very easily think of worldly objects. This is its nature. Thoughts generally
flow with ease towards objects. The mental energy readily flows in that direction. The mental forcecan easily flow in the old grooves and avenues of mundane thoughts. But the mind finds it difficultto think of God. It is an uphill work for a worldly mind to fix itself on God. The difficulty inweaning the mind away from objects and fixing it on God is the same as trying to make the Gangesflow towards Badrinarayan instead of its natural flow towards the ocean. It is like rowing againstthe current of the Jamuna river. Nevertheless, through strenuous effort and renunciation it must betrained to flow towards God, much against its will, if you wish to free yourself from birth and death.There is no other way if you want to escape from worldly miseries and tribulations.
Destroy the stains of thought through discrimination and constant effort and get drowned in
the ocean of Brahmic bliss. When you try to bury your shadow in the earth, it always reappears. Soalso, when you try to destroy thoughts through discrimination, they will reappear again and again.Withdraw the mind from the objects and act according to the instructions of your Guru. Purify themind and fix it in the heart. The mind will then be destroyed in course of time. This is certain.
Do not for a moment contemplate upon the things of the world. You need not exert too much
to rid yourself of this thought-process. With the checking of all thoughts, one’s mind will perish. Tocrush a full-blown flower in one’s hand requires a little effort only, but even this little effort is notneeded to do away with the mind. If you destroy the impure mind through the pure mind, you willrest firmly in your own essential Self.
113KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book When you are established in the idea that the world is unreal, then the tossing of the mind,
brought about by thoughts, will vanish slowly.
Repeat the following formula daily: “Brahma satyam jagat mithya, jeevo Brahmaiva na
aparah—Brahman alone is real; the world is unreal; the Jiva is identical with Brahman”. You will
gain immense strength and peace of mind through the repetition of this formula.
Having freed yourself from all desire for the visible objects appearing before you and,
having made your impure mind firm and steady through the power of your pure mind, eradicate allthoughts that arise in the mind. This mind, which exists because of thoughts, will then perish.
With the extinction of base thoughts there will be the extinction of ignorance and its effect,
the mind. Thoughts generate pain. The state of thoughtlessness confers bliss. Sit alone in a solitaryroom and close your eyes. Watch the mind and destroy the thought-forms that arise one by one bymeans of your continuous and energetic efforts. Then Samadhi will ensue.
If, with the extinction of the pain-producing thoughts, the mind is also destroyed, then the
thick forest of delusion that has been affecting you from the remote past, will dissipate itself. Then,like an unobscured sky in the autumnal season, Brahman alone will shine resplendent, blissful,imperishable, non-dual, formless and without birth and death.
When all your thoughts, which are now dispersed, are collected together and you remain in
a state of repose, then the eternally blissful Atman will shine forth as the reflection of the sun seenon the clear surface of the water.
Peace is not to be had in money, in the opposite sex or in eating. When the mind becomes
desireless and thoughtless, the Atman shines and sheds forth eternal bliss and peace. Why then doyou search in vain for happiness in the objects outside? Search within for the supreme bliss in thesubjective Satchidananda Brahman.
39
PLEASURE IS THE SOURCE OF PAIN
The pleasures that are born of contact with objects are truly the womb of pain, for
they have a beginning and an end, O Kaunteya! The wise do not rejoice in them.
(V-22)
Pleasure is the womb of pain. Pleasure is the cause of pain. If you do not want pain then give
up pleasure. If you do not want death, then give up birth.
You cannot have pleasure without pain. Wherever there is pleasure, there is pain also. You
seek vainly for pleasure in gold, in the opposite sex and in this mundane existence. You cannot have
114EXTINCTION OF THOUGHTS IS YOGAThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book absolute happiness on a relative physical plane of the pairs of opposites. The pairs of opposites
rotate in their turn. Death follows life; night follows day; pain follows pleasure.
Pleasure is simply the titillation of the nerves. It is due to the play of nerves. It is the
irritation of the nerves. When you scratch the skin, redness is produced because the nerves areirritated and a large quantity of blood is drawn towards the irritated part. When you take a cold bathin summer, the blood vessels of the skin contract and all the blood is sent to the heart. Hence therearises a feeling of exhilaration of spirit. When you take a hot bath, the blood from within is drawn tothe skin or periphery. You perspire profusely. It brings about a depression of spirit after some time.When a sex-impulse travels from the brain to the reproductive system, the nerves of the generativeorgan are irritated and blood flows profusely to that area on account of the irritation of the nerves.When you think deeply, more blood is drawn to the brain. Sudden fear drains blood away from thebrain and the heart and you get a confused state of mind and collapse of the heart takes place.
All this is a play of the nerves, coupled with centralisation of blood in a particular area. The
pleasure that you derive through the senses is due to nerve-irritation. This is not real happiness atall. If you call this pleasure, you will have to take the sensation caused by scratching of the groinsowing to ringworm patches also as very great pleasure.
Sensual pleasure lasts for a few seconds only. As long as there is a piece of sweetmeat in the
mouth, there is some pleasant sensation. As long as there is the contact of the sounds of melodiousmusic with the ears, so long there is some pleasant feeling within. Sexual pleasure lasts for a fewseconds only.
Sensual pleasure is tantalising. There is enchantment only as long as a person does not
possess the object. He exerts hard. His mind is full of anxiety. He is under despondency as towhether he will secure the object or not. The moment he is in possession of the object, the charmvanishes. He finds that he is entangled.
The bachelor thinks of his marriage day and night. But after his marriage he feels that he is
imprisoned. He is not able to satisfy the extravagant wants of his wife. He likes to run away from hishome into the forest. A rich but childless man thinks that he will be happier by getting a son. Heworries himself day and night to get a son. He goes on pilgrimages to holy places like Rameswaramand performs various religious ceremonies. But when he does get a son he feels miserable. Thechild suffers from epileptic fits and his entire wealth is spent on the doctors. There is no cure.
You are constantly endeavouring to possess something which you have not. When you
cannot get the object, you feel miserable. The man who is addicted to tea, who is in the habit oftaking fruit after meals, feels very miserable when he cannot get tea or fruit in a place. Headmonishes his wife and servants without any rhyme or reason, out of irritability. When the wifedies, the husband gets drowned in sorrow, not because of the loss of his loving partner in life, butbecause he cannot now get sexual pleasure.
Pain manifests itself when there is absence of pleasure. There cannot be any pain without a
previous experience of pleasure. The man who has been all along sleeping on a soft bed willexperience pain if he sleeps on a rough bed one day. He remembers the pleasure that he derived
115KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book from the soft bed when he sleeps on a coarse one. The man who is in the habit of sleeping on a
coarse bed will never get any pain by sleeping on such a bed. The pain manifests only along with themind’s remembrance of pleasure. The cause of pain is pleasure. The cause of death is love ofsensual life. Give up sensual pleasures if you want to be free from pain. Give up sensual life if youdo not want death.
There is a grain of pleasure in objects but the pain that is mixed with it is of the size of a
mountain. Pleasure is mixed with fear, pain, anxiety, sin and exertion. One cent of pleasure is mixedwith a thousand cents of pain. Pleasure that is mixed with pain is no pleasure at all.
The same object that gives you pleasure also gives you pain. Though there is pleasure in
copulation, exhaustion and weakness follow the act. So you will have to weigh carefully theadvantages and disadvantages that you derive from the possession and enjoyment of objects, andselect from them only those which give you the maximum of pleasure and a minimum of pain. Thisis the work of the intellect.
That man in whom right reason has developed will be able to discriminate and enjoy peace
and bliss. The common run of people go wildly after each and every object and are swayed byemotions, passions, impulses and low appetites. Their position is extremely deplorable indeed.They are driven hither and thither by petty likes and dislikes. Their position is in no way better thanthat of a piece of straw that is tossed about hither and thither by the wind.
Many rich persons, in spite of their immense wealth and possession of two or three wives,
are extremely miserable and unhappy. I have come into contact with several such rich landlords.They are all discontented, restless, peevish and extremely miserable. It is evident, therefore, thathappiness does not lie in money, objects and in the opposite sex. Only he who has controlled hismind can be happy. “Uneasy lies the head that wears the crown”.
Wherever there is pleasure, there you will find pain, anger and attachment. You derive great
pain from fear of losing the pleasurable objects. The fear worries you constantly. On this score, aphilosopher and an aspirant ruthlessly shun all sorts of illusive mundane pleasures. There are nopleasures at all to a discriminating mind. Pain appears as pleasure owing to your delusion. You getmore pain from craving. It constantly worries and torments you. If you have once tasted pleasure,the craving remains for ever. It troubles you greatly.
In old age there is intense agony. The longing and desire are there. The old man has not the
strength to satisfy his desires. He has no teeth but there is the longing to eat hard stuffs. Somehow hemanages in a way by soaking the articles in water or milk. But this does not give him completesatisfaction. The pain is there in the mind. He thinks again and again of his old days of boyhood andjuvenile vigour and sobs heavily.
It is on account of craving and fear that philosopher shuns all worldly objects. But dull
worldlings rush headlong and impetuously after objects without an iota of thought. The worldaffords pleasure to a thoughtless man, but to a man of enquiry the same world is a ball of fire. Thelatter will try his level best to get rid of all worldly desires. The satisfaction of a desire does notcome by enjoyment of the objects of desire. On the contrary, the desires get aggravated like the fire
116PLEASURE IS THE SOURCE OF PAINThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book into which ghee has been poured. It is by renunciation of desires alone that satisfaction and peace
result. Owing to delusion pain appears as pleasure to the worldlings. But a man of discrimination
shuns all worldly objects ruthlessly. Raja Bhartrihari, Raja Gopichand and Buddha deserted theirkingdoms and all pleasurable objects, music, palaces, children and wives in order to attain the blissof the Atman which is everlasting. They attained immortality. They were not fools. Had there beenreal happiness in objects they would have remained in the world.
Worldly people struggle hard to get more and more pleasures by increasing their wants and
comforts and trying to increase their earning capacity. In the end they get more and more entangled.They do not find pleasure in sensual objects. On the contrary, they experience more and more pain.
If you develop the power of endurance, if you train yourself to rejoice in suffering, if you
think that everything is done by God for one’s own betterment and uplift, if you welcome pain as amessenger of God to make you remember Him and to infuse in you more mercy and the power ofendurance, you will enjoy constant, perennial bliss even amidst great suffering and calamity. Thenpain will not be pain any more. Suffering will not be suffering any more. There will be no necessityfor selfish worldly struggles for accumulating wealth and acquiring name and fame. Greed, hatredand turmoil will then disappear completely. You will be free from all pain and suffering. You willforever rest in the everlasting peace and bliss within. You will rejoice within. This is not thephilosophy of the stoics. This is not the teaching of the pessimists. This is wonderful optimism thatgoads you on to realise the deep, abiding eternal joy and unruffled peace of the Self within.
40
EXTINGUISH THE FIRE OF DESIRE
Enveloped, O son of Kunti, is wisdom by this constant enemy of the wise in the form of
desire, which is unappeasable as the fire!
(III-39)
The cause of all actions is desire. A desire crops up in your mind for an object. Then you
exert to possess the object. Desire is the motive power that keeps up the continuance of life. Desireis an offspring of ignorance. By annihilating ignorance and attaining the Self, you can destroy allsorts of desires. Desire is the real fetter that binds a man to this world. When all desires are rentasunder by the dawn of knowledge of the Self, there is salvation from the bondage of worldlyexistence.
The mind plays havoc through desires. As soon as a desire arises, you think that you will get
happiness by its fulfilment. You exert to achieve the desired object. As soon as you get it, a littlesatisfaction, a little gratification is experienced for a short time. Once again the mind becomesrestless and agitated, it wants new sensations. Disgust and dissatisfaction come in. Again it wantssome new objects for its enjoyment. That is the reason why this world is termed as mereimagination by the Vedantins. They look upon everything as unreal.
117KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Desires are innumerable, insatiable and unconquerable. Enjoyment cannot bring
satisfaction. It is a mistake to think so. Enjoyment only fans a desire. It is like pouring ghee in the
fire. Enjoyment strengthens, increases and aggravates a desire.
See the fate of Raja Yayati of yore. He borrowed the youthful state from his son to have
sexual enjoyment for thousands of years. At last he cried out in his old age with bitterness, “Alas!
what a fool I am! Still my sexual desires are waxing. There is no end to desire. I have wasted mylife. O God! have mercy on me. Lift me up from this mire of worldly existence”. This story appearsin the Mahabharata.
A man at Darjeeling thinks that Mussoorie is a better place; the Mussoorie man vainly
imagines that Nainital is a better place. It is all a trick of the mind. Distance lends enchantment tothe view. Wherever you go, you have the same sky, the same earth, the same five elements and thesame passions. Rest in peace at one place and think of God.
You can go wherever you like—to Gulmarg or Pahalgam in Kashmir, to Darjeeling or
Simla in the Himalayas, to Vienna or the Alps in the continent of Europe—you will not find any realrest. The charming scenery may soothe the retina for a second, but attraction, repulsion, jealousy,passion and greed are everywhere. And you carry the same mind with you wherever you go.Imagination and change of place have deceived many. So be contented. Live wherever you like.Discipline the mind and the senses. Meditate on the inner Self ceaselessly. Here you will findeverlasting peace. The mind will stop deceiving you now.
In this ocean of worldly existence, desires are like crocodiles. Kill them as soon as they arise
on the surface of the mind. Do not yield to them. Do not become despondent under your trials. Makefriendship with the pure, Sattwic mind and destroy the impure mind with the help of the pure mind.Make your mind rest in the blissful Atman. Desires should be crushed the very moment they arise inthe mind, by discrimination and dauntless, indefatigable effort.
Whenever a desire arises in the mind consult your power of discrimination at once. Your
discrimination will tell you immediately that it is attended by pain, that it is only a vain temptationset up by the mind, and that dispassion and renunciation alone can bring about satisfaction andpeace of mind. It will advise you to renounce the desire immediately and to take to the study of theUpanishads and repetition of Om. It will advise you to have absorption in Samadhi in a solitary
place on the banks of the sacred Ganges. Think deeply again and again whether the new desire willgive you more happiness or more spiritual gain. Discrimination will guide you to take up the help ofthe will and drive away the desire immediately. Discrimination and will are the two potent weaponsfor an aspirant on the path of Jnana Yoga to destroy evil and temptation and remove all major andminor impediments.
Just as you starve a plant by depriving it of water, so also you can starve out obnoxious
desires by not allowing the mind to dwell upon such desires. You have no desire for a thing till youknow what it is like. It is only after you have seen it or heard of it or touched it that you get a longingfor it. Therefore, the best principle for a man is not to take, touch or see anything that is likely totaint the imagination. You will have to turn aside the attention resolutely, and particularly theimagination, from the subject. In course of time all objectionable desires will die out.
118EXTINGUISH THE FIRE OF DESIREThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Even after you have renounced all desires, there may remain in the mind some subtle,
hidden desires that cannot be comprehended. These are very dangerous ones. Therefore, you will
have to be very, very careful. The lurking undercurrent of desires will throw you down at anymoment if you are not very vigilant and cautious. They will destroy your dispassion and bring aboutyour downfall eventually. I have witnessed many who have fallen from Yoga due to theoverpowering influence of these subtle, hidden desires. As long as you have these subtle, hidden,unnoticeable desires in your mind, you can never dream of entering into Nirvikalpa Samadhi. Youcan never develop supreme dispassion also.
You may become old and your hair may turn grey, but your mind will be ever young. The
capacity may vanish, but the craving will remain even when you have reached advanced senility.Cravings are the real seeds of birth. These craving-seeds give rise to thought and action. The wheelof worldly existence is kept revolving by these cravings. Nip them in the bud. Then only will you besafe. You will get liberation. The constant meditation on Brahman and the repetition of Om anddevotion to the Lord will root out these craving-seeds which lie deep within. You will have to digthem out properly from the various corners and burn them beyond resurrection. Then only will yourefforts bear the fruit of Samadhi.
When a desire arises in the mind, a worldling welcomes it and tries to fulfil it. But an
aspirant renounces it immediately through discrimination. Wise people consider even a spark ofdesire as a very great evil. Therefore, they will not entertain any kind of desire. They remain everdelighted in the Atman only.
A desire arises in the mind. There is now a thought-wave. This thought-wave agitates your
mind till you get satisfaction through enjoyment of the desired object. There is peace or happinessafter the enjoyment is over. Now another desire arises in the mind. During the interval between thegratification of one desire and the manifestation of another, there is pure bliss, because there is nomind then. The mind is at rest. You are now in union with Brahman. This state of pure bliss betweentwo desires is the state of God-consciousness, the state of oneness with Brahman. If you canprolong this period of bliss through intense and protracted Sadhana, by keeping up the idea that youare Brahman, and by not allowing another thought-wave or desire to manifest, you will be in thestate of Samadhi or union with Brahman.
41
PEACE FLOWS FROM DESIRELESSNESS
That man attains peace who, abandoning all desires, moves about without longing,
without the sense of mine and without egoism.
(II-71)
Every man in the world is restless and is striving after something; what, he does not know.
He feels he is in want of something, the nature of which he does not exactly comprehend. He seeks
119KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book in the accomplishment of ambitious projects the rest that he feels he is in need of. But he finds that
worldly greatness, when secured, is a delusion and a snare; he doubtless does not find anyhappiness or peace in it. He gets degrees, diplomas, titles, honour, power, name and fame; hemarries; he begets children; in short, he gets all that he supposes would give him happiness. But hefinds no rest. Pious men, saints and sages declare that this restlessness of every man, this state ofdiscontent, uncomfortableness and dissatisfaction of being ill at ease with himself and hissurroundings is due to the loss of the companionship of his Soul.
Rich people possess immense wealth. They have all sorts of comforts, easy circumstances
and easy-going life. They have decent motor cars and beautiful bungalows. They take dainties andpalatable dishes and go to hill-stations during summer. And yet they have no peace of mind becausethey have no inner harmony. There is discord in their hearts on account of their greed, selfishness,egoism, lust, pride, fear, hatred, anger and worry. Outward harmony and quietness cannot give youreal peace of mind.
The peace of God is an internal state. You can have it without the help of money and
outwardly favourable circumstances. You may have sorrows and yet you may enjoy the inwardharmony and peace if you constantly rest in God by withdrawing the senses, by stilling the mindand eradicating its impurities. Lord Jesus was persecuted in a variety of ways. He was put to deathon the cross and yet, what did he say? He said, “O Lord, forgive them. They know not what they aredoing”. How peaceful he was even when his life was at stake! He was enjoying the inner peace. Notribulation or calamity could touch him.
Peace is absolute serenity and tranquillity, wherein all the mental modifications, thoughts,
imaginations, whims, fancies, moods, impulses, emotions and instincts cease entirely and theindividual soul rests in its own native pristine glory in an unruffled state. It is not the temporarycondition of mental quietude which people speak of in common parlance when they retire for ashort time to a solitary bungalow in a forest for a little rest when they are tired after a long journey.Peace is the fourth condition of Superconsciousness. Peace is the realm of infinite bliss where cares,worries, anxieties and fears, which torment the soul, dare not enter, it is the realm of eternalsunshine where all distinctions of caste, creed and colour disappear in the warm embrace of divinelove, and where desires and cravings find their full satiety. Peace is eternal life in the pure Spirit, inthe highest Self.
Peace is within. Search for it within the chambers of your heart through one-pointed
concentration and meditation. If you do not find peace there, you will not find it anywhere else.
Peace can be found only within. You certainly cannot find it in external objects. Look
within. Sit silently in a room from half an hour to one hour. Close your eyes. Relax the muscles andnerves. Concentrate at the space between the eyebrows. Withdraw the senses and the mind fromexternal objects. Forget the body and the world. Meditate regularly in the early morning hours.Enter into the great calm or the secret place of the Most High.
The thirst for objects is the greatest enemy of peace. Desire causes distraction of various
sorts. There cannot be an iota or tinge of happiness for a man who is thirsting for sensual objects.
120PEACE FLOWS FROM DESIRELESSNESSThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book The mind will be ever restless and hanker after the objects. When this thirst dies, man enjoys peace.
Only such a person can meditate and rest in the Self.
Give up desire, craving, longing, egoism and “mine”-ness. You will get peace. The peace of
the Eternal lies very close to those who know themselves, who are disjoined from desire andpassion, who are of subdued nature and thought. The man who is endowed with supreme faith andwho has mastery over his senses gets supreme peace quickly.
If you wish to enter into the great peace of God, all worldly desires must die, all the senses
should be brought under your perfect control and the mind should be stilled. Peace is in that manwho has given up “mine”-ness and “I”-ness, who has given up cravings, desires and longing forobjects. That man alone will have peace. Peace is not in a bungalow in a forest. Peace can beenjoyed only by him who has dispassion, who has understood the magnitude of human sufferinghere, who knows the real value of this earth, which is composed of the five elements, colours andsounds. Peace can be had only by the man who has understood the worthlessness of the perishableobjects and the passing powers and positions in this world and has no desire for them. The world isnothing to a man of discrimination. He who has found out the real worth of this world, who yearnsfor liberation, who has understood that beyond the names and forms there is one eternal, everlastingAtman, and who practises self-discipline—he alone can have peace. Such a man is the King ofkings, not he who is simply carried away by a little colour, by a little touch and a little nervetitillation. He is forever miserable who has no discrimination and dispassion, who does notdiscriminate between the Eternal and the non-Eternal, between the Real and the unreal. To a man ofenquiry the world is nothing more than a little bit of sensation and titillation of the nerves.Therefore, develop the spirit of enquiry, discrimination and dispassion. Dispassion is a mentalstate. The man who has dispassion is the strongest man. He has inner spiritual strength born ofdispassion. He is the most peaceful man. Dispassion is real spiritual wealth because it opens thedoor of intuition, the door of Brahman, where you will get eternal sunshine, everlasting peace andbliss.
If you annihilate selfishness, greed and egoism, Nature will work for you. You will have to
co-operate with Nature, then Nature will carry your burden of life on its head. You can now remainquite at ease. You will be free from cares, worries, anxieties, responsibilities and fears. Theindividual will will become one with the Cosmic Will. Your aim will become one with that of theCosmic. Then there will be no obstacles or impediments in your way. Whosoever makes asurrender of his selfish aims and interests to the Will of the Lord will enjoy supreme peace andperennial bliss.
121KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 42
THE ATTRIBUTELESS BRAHMAN
Greater is their trouble whose minds are set on the Unmanifested; for the goal, the
Unmanifested, is very hard for the embodied to reach.
(XII-5)
The Prasna, Tapaniya andKathavalli Upanishads elaborately treat of the methods of
contemplation on Brahman as devoid of qualities. Sri Badarayana, in a chapter of the Brahma
Sutras , which deals with the nature of the qualities of Brahman, mentions positive attributes like
“joyful” and intelligent” as well as negative attributes like “measureless” and “colourless”. Both
kinds of attributes are mentioned with reference to the Absolute; yet, the contemplation on such aBrahman can be called Nirguna or meditation on the attributes Brahman. The fundamentaldistinction between contemplation of the conditioned or Saguna Brahman and the unconditioned orNirguna Brahman is that in the former the devotee looks upon Brahman as really connected withthose attributes, while in the latter the positive and negative qualities are not viewed as essentiallyconnected with Brahman, but as suggesting Its absolute nature. That is to say, “joyful” and the likedo not enter into the essence of the Brahman contemplated upon but act as a gateway for graspingIts true nature. In the contemplation on the conditioned Brahman, those and similar other propertiesform a part of the contemplation.
By Nirguna, it does not mean that Brahman is a negative concept, that It is a non-entity or
zero. It means that the qualities found here in limitation are found illimitably in Brahman. It meansthat the attributes are the essential nature of Brahman. It means that Brahman does not possess theperishable qualities of matter like the blue colour of a cloth, but possesses all the auspiciousqualities. Brahman is without attributes too. So also, by Nirakara, it does not mean that Brahman isformless. It means that He has not a limited form as that of objects but has a form unimaginable.What form can you attribute to Infinity?
Many possess a crude idea of Brahman. They say that Brahman is a block of stone because
He has no form, no qualities. They say that He is a regular void, a zero. No, no. They are entirelymistaken. They have not studied the infallible Upanishads, which are the right means of
knowledge, the right source of wisdom, which give an accurate knowledge of Brahman. TheUpanishads are infallible because they appeal to the reason of every thinker, every philosopher.
They tally with the experiences of realisation. Hence they are infallible. Their authority is morevalid than that of perception and inference. The ill-formed critics have not had Satsanga with sages.They have various doubts. They have a gross mind which is unfit for philosophical investigation,discrimination, reflection and ratiocination. Brahman is extremely subtle. He is finer than thethousandth part of a point of hair divided into a thousand parts. A subtle, calm, pure, one-pointedand clear intellect is needed to understand Brahman and meditate on It. The ignorant critics sufferfrom doubts regarding the validity of the Upanishads and the true nature of Brahman. They should
purify the mind by means of selfless service and study of the Upanishads. They should develop the
four qualifications and have constant Satsang with educated, practical Sannyasins. Then they will
122THE ATTRIBUTELESS BRAHMANThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book have intellectual conviction and also an intellectual grasp of Brahman. By hearing, reflection and
contemplation they can reach Brahman. This is the royal road.
So, Brahman is full of auspicious Gunas. He is a lump of luminosity. He is a solid mass of
knowledge. He is pure awareness. He is really more solid than the Himalayas. Knowledge isheavier and more concrete than a huge block of stone.
In Saguna meditation the devotee considers himself as entirely different from the object of
worship. The worshipper makes a total, unreserved, ungrudging self-surrender to the Lord. Herespects, honours and adores the Lord and depends on Him for everything—for food, for protectionand for his very existence. For every sort of help he always looks to his Deity. There is nothingindependent for him. He is an instrument in the hands of the Lord. His hands, legs, senses, mind,intellect and physical body belong to the Lord. A devotee does not at all like the idea of Jnana ormerging. He likes to have his separate entity as a servant, and likes to serve, worship and love theLord always. He does not like to become sugar (as in the case of the Adwaitin), but likes to taste andeat sugar. This method of worship is one of contraction.
Suppose there is a circle. You have a position in the centre. You have to contract yourself to
a point and merge in the circumference. This is the path of devotion or Saguna meditation. This issuitable for people of emotional temperament. The vast majority are fit for this line of worship only.
In Nirguna meditation the aspirant takes himself to be Brahman. He denies and sublates all
the false adjuncts or fictitious entities like egoism, mind and body. He depends upon himself alone.He possesses self-reliance. He asserts boldly. He reflects, discriminates, investigates, reasons outand meditates on the Self. He does not want to taste sugar but wishes to become a solid mass ofsugar itself. He wants to merge in the Absolute. He likes to be identical with Brahman. This methodis one of expansion of the lower self.
Suppose there is a circle. You have a position in the centre. You expand by Sadhana to such
a very great extent that you occupy the whole circle and envelop the circumference. This method ofmeditation is suitable for persons of fine intellect, bold understanding, strong and accuratereasoning power and a powerful will. Only a microscopic minority are fit for this line of meditation.
It is comparatively easy to meditate on “Aham Brahma Asmi” when you are seated in a
steady posture in a solitary, closed room; but it is very, very difficult to keep up this feeling amidstcrowded surroundings while the body moves. If you meditate for one hour and feel that you are theAtman, and if you feel for the remaining twenty-three hours that you are the body, the Sadhana isperfectly useless and will not produce the desired result. So, at all times you should try to keep upthe idea that you are Brahman. This is very, very important. You must keep the mind fully occupiedwith this one thought. A worldly mind needs a thorough overhaul and a complete psychologicaltransformation. This method of practice brings about the construction of a new mind and a newmode of thought. A contemplative life is diametrically opposite to worldly life. It is an entirechange altogether. The old impressions of sense-objects have to be thoroughly annihilated throughconstant and intense practices carded on with zeal for a long time until new spiritual impressionshave been formed.
123KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book 43
THE PRACTICE OF EQUAL VISION
Sages look with an equal eye on a Brahmin endowed with learning and humility, on a
cow, on an elephant, and even on a dog and an outcaste.
(V-18)
God will test the aspirants to see whether they see Him in all beings—in dogs and horses, in
snakes and scorpions, in outcastes and Brahmins. Nowadays there are numerous aspirants who will
not give even a drop of water to a thirsty man. They will pose as great devotees and shout: “HeyKrishna”, “Hey Rama”. If they cannot serve and love the living God, how then can they serve andlove the unseen Lord?
Namdev was tested. Lord Vittala of Pandharpur assumed the form of a dog and appeared
before him. It was a marvellous instance when a Bhakta exhibited his true devotion to the Lord.You all know the story how the dog snatched a piece of bread from Namdev. Namdev ran after thedog, saying, “O Lord please do not run away. Kindly let me put some ghee on the bread so that your
throat might not get hurt.”
Sri Sankara was also tested. He had a little egoism of caste. He was a Brahmin by birth. Lord
Shiva assumed the form of a low-caste Harijan and appeared before Sankara. Sankara did not like totread the same path trodden by the Harijan. Then the Harijan asked, “O Sankara! you are a greatAdwaitic philosopher. Where is your equal vision now? Where is your Vedanta or oneness of life?You are showing dislike to me as I am a low-caste person. You still have the Brahmin-ego. Where isyour Adwaita philosophy now? Does your body contain more elements than mine? Does yourAtman differ from my Atman?”
Sri Sankara was really ashamed. He at once recognised that the outcaste was not really an
outcaste. He reflected: “This person cannot talk such lofty philosophy if he were an outcaste. It isonly Lord Shiva who has come here to test me. I still have some traces of caste egoism.” He at onceprostrated before the outcaste and touched his feet. Immediately the outcaste assumed the form ofLord Shiva.
The state of equal vision is much misunderstood. Equal vision is with reference to the one
common Consciousness or Atman in all beings. Giving apples or grapes to pigs is not equal vision.The pigs will not like them. They like only their own delicious food. A Jivanmukta who has equalvision will not embrace all women who pass along the road, saying, “I have equal vision in man andwoman.” He will not walk on his head, saying, “I have equal vision in my legs and head.” He willnot eat faecal matter, saying, “I have equal vision in rice and faecal matter.” He will not eat throughthe anus, saying, “I have equal vision in the anus and mouth.”
The body is mistaken for the Atman and licentiousness is practised in the name of Vedantic
equal vision by people of small understanding.
124THE PRACTICE OF EQUAL VISIONThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book TheSruti declares: “He who sees all beings in the Self and the Self in all beings, shrinks not
from anything thereafter. He who sees the one Atman or the Supreme Self in all beings, how can
there be delusion or grief for him? How can he be afraid of anything?”
TheGita also says: “The self, harmonised by Yoga, sees the Atman in all beings and all
beings in the Self; everywhere he sees the same”.
You can have the Adwaitic feeling but you cannot have oneness in action. If there are three
litres of milk and if there are twenty inmates in an Ashram, the three litres should be given to the sixsick persons only.
The devotee feels that the world is a manifestation of the Lord and that all movements and
actions are His Lilas. He has no repugnance or dislike for faecal matter and dirt, and for an outcaste,scavenger, cobbler, beggar, prostitute and thief. He says, “I see everywhere my sweet Lord. It isHari who is playing the part of the prostitute, thief, dacoit and scavenger.” He has an exalted,all-embracing, all-inclusive, mental state. This cannot be adequately described in words. It has tobe felt. Mira, Gauranga, Hafiz, Tulsidas, Kabir and Ramdas enjoyed this state. Tulsidas says:“Know everything as Sita and Ram, and with folded hands do salutations to all, to everything”.
In the Purusha Sukta you will find a description of the Purusha: “With hands and feet
everywhere, with eyes, heads and mouths everywhere, with ears everywhere, He exists in theworld, enveloping all”.
Lord Krishna gives advice to Uddhava and prescribes an easy method of realising Him:
“Know, Uddhava, that the Brahmin, the outcaste, the ass, the dog, the king, the beggar are all Myforms. When you meet any object, do prostration and feel My Presence in it”.
Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa prostrated before an outcaste girl and said, “O Mother Kali!
I see Thee in this girl.”
Pavahari Baba followed a thief who had come to steal from him. He ran after him with a bag
of vessels and addressed him thus, “O thief Narayana! pray, accept these things. I never knew thatyou were in my cottage.”
Ekanath, a Maharashtra Bhakta, gave his ring voluntarily to a thief when the latter entered
the house. He said to the thief, “O thief! take this ring also. Your duty is to steal things. Thou artVittala. Keep up this play of yours.”
Have you understood the sublime state of these exalted Bhaktas who had a new angle of
vision? This state will come to you one day. Exert. Struggle. Pray. Worship. Meditate. Plungeyourself in Bhajan with zeal, earnestness and fervour.
The practice of the Presence of God always is the easiest, quickest and surest way of
reaching God-consciousness. Feel His Presence always and everywhere. Feel His indwellingPresence in everything—in flowers, trees, dogs, horses, human beings, stars, sun, moon and in thefive elements. Feel that you think, feel, cogitate, know, wish, talk, write and walk because of His
125KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Grace only. Feel His Presence in all movements. Feel your oneness with everything. You are sad
and depressed because you have failed or forgotten to feel His Presence.
He never talks or smiles but His Presence is sufficient for me. I am always in joy, in bliss, in
knowledge and immortality in His Presence. This kind of Sadhana eventually leads to resting in theattributeless, formless Brahman. All forms vanish.
When you feel His Presence always, everywhere and in everything, then the ideas of good
and bad, the idea of sex totally disappear. Every food then becomes Sattwic and holy. When you areamongst children, feel that you are one with them. When you are in the midst of women, be one withthem. When you are seated on a block of stone, be one with the stone. This is cosmic identification.All is good, all is sacred because Shiva dwells in all. This practice will give the bliss of oneness, thebliss of “all”-ness.
Many Vedantic practitioners fail in their endeavours to realise the Self despite their long
years of practice. The students of the path of Jnana Yoga should take up this practice of the Presenceof God first. It will eventually end in the “Aham Brahma Asmi” realisation. Para Bhakti is pureJnana only.
The toy elephant made of wood hides the reality of “wood” when you take it for an elephant.
Even so, these names and forms conceal the reality “Brahman” behind them. Get rid of the illusionin the mind that is deep-rooted from beginningless time. The toy elephant is wood only; it is not anelephant. So also, this is Brahman and not the world. This is the Atman and not the body. Take theessence that is true after throwing off the false thing, namely, the elephant, world and body.
Duality is the very nature of the mind. It can never think in terms of unity. It is through the
purity of the mind that it can be trained to think in terms of unity.
Clay is the only reality in all the three periods of time. The pot is an unreal thing. The
Chhandogya Upanishad says: “Clay only is the reality. The modifications such as jar and pot are in
speech only, like ornaments”. Similarly, Brahman is the only Reality, the eternal Substance whichhas no beginning, no end, no change. The modifications—body, mind, senses and world—aretotally false. They are in name only. See the clay in all earthenware vessels. See the Atman in allobjects.
Cows are different. They differ in colour and various other particulars. But the milk from
them is the same. Man minus the customs, manners, modes of dress and eating, is the samethroughout the world. His passions and feelings are the same throughout the world. The languagesare different in various districts and climes, but the idea behind all languages is the same. This isoneness behind variety, duality and multiplicity.
There is one essence or one feeling in deep sleep. All feel alike. There is no plurality in
sleep. Similarly, there is one homogeneous substance behind the objects. This is the Atman. This isyour real Self.
126THE PRACTICE OF EQUAL VISIONThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book The coconut made of sugar is sugar only. It has marks, lines, external shell, ridges, eyes and
everything. But you have the inner feeling in the mind that it is only sugar. Similarly, even though
you see the different objects of the universe, you must have the feeling that it is the Atman that is atthe bottom of all the objects, and that the Atman is the ultimate Reality and essence of everything.
Why do you look into the leaves, twigs, flowers and fruit of the mango tree? Look into the
source, the seed. The cloth is only cotton and thread. Take the cloth as cotton only. In a similarmanner, take the world as Atman only.
When you see any person or object, think and feel that he or it is Narayana. By incessant
practice the name and form will vanish. The Atman alone will shine. The world-idea will vanish. Ittakes a long time. It demands strenuous efforts. You will see and feel the Atman or Narayana onlyeverywhere. During the practice your old impressions will trouble you. They are your real enemies.Fight against them boldly. This is the practice of seeing equality everywhere. You will thentransmute all objects in the Atman. Think and feel that all actions are worship of the Atman. Thenthe idea of inferiority and the idea of menial service will disappear and you will see Narayanaeverywhere.
44
UNITY OF CONSCIOUSNESS
There is nothing whatsoever higher than Me, O Dhananjaya! All this is strung on Me,
as clusters of gems on a string.
(VII-7)
If you imagine that there is nothing but protoplasm in this universe then all the forms will
vanish. All forms are constructed out of one kind of matter only. A tree or a man, a dog, a bug or amosquito, are made up of the same kind of matter or protoplasm. The protoplasm is a mould ofmatter in which all life is placed. It is a homogeneous, structureless substance, forming the physicalbasis of life, endowed with contractility, with a chemical composition allied to that of albumen. Thethread of matter that connects all forms is one and the same. You can also imagine that there isnothing but energy or mind in this universe. The student on the path of Jnana Yoga thinks that thereis only one thread of pure Consciousness.
Behind the names and forms, there is the universal life or hidden Brahman or immanent
God. Try to feel the reality behind the forms. Scorn not at the tiny creatures or the undevelopedbeings. The same life that throbs or pulsates in you is also throbbing in ants, dogs, elephants and allcreatures. Realise your identity and intimate relationship with all creatures. There is only adifference in the degree of manifestation or expression. All forms belong to God or SagunaBrahman. Look at a tree or a shrub, a dog or a cat, and endeavour to behold the real hidden life orConsciousness behind and under the veil or form. If you practise like this for some time you willderive inexpressible joy. All hatred will cease. You will eventually develop cosmic love and unity
127KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book of Consciousness. This will be a very rare and magnanimous experience. It will result in the
Vedantic realisation of oneness.
Life is common in trees, ants, birds, animals and human beings. What is common in the sun,
moon, stars, chairs, walls, stones, animals, birds and human beings? It is existence. A table exists; atree exists. Existence is the Sat aspect of the Satchidananda Brahman.
There is only an apparent, fictitious difference in bodies and minds. There are differences in
colour and opinion. But the Atman is the same in all. A thief, a prostitute, a scavenger, a king, arogue, a saint, a dog, a cat and a rat—all these have the same common Atman. Ignore the falseappearances and differences. Recognise the Essence or Reality only.
The one Atman appears to be many, just as the one sun appears to be many in various pots of
water. Many suns are false. They are merely reflections only. So also, many Jivas are illusory. Theone Brahman alone is real.
The divine life that throbs in every atom of the universe dwells also in the hearts of human
beings. The soul of an ant is the soul of a man. The soul of a sinner is the soul of a saint. The soul of abeggar is the soul of a mighty king. The ultimate Truth in Nature is the ultimate Reality in man.
Whatever you see is God. Whatever you hear is God. Whatever you taste is God. Whatever
you smell is God. Whatever you feel is God. These are the manifest aspects of God. The physicalbody belongs to Virat. The astral body belongs to Hiranyagarbha. The causal body belongs toIswara. Where is the little “I” now?
Have an integral cosmic vision. Behold unity in diversity. Break the barriers or dividing
walls through discrimination, enquiry and wisdom. Acquire the spiritual vision of oneness or unity.Soar high in the realm of eternal bliss. Happy is he who has realised the oneness of the Self and whois endowed with the sublime vision of the marvellous Atman.
Realise that the whole human race is one. Break up ruthlessly all illusory barriers that
separate man from man. Understand that the fundamental principles underlying all religions are thesame.
Feel your oneness with all. Feel your oneness with the sun, the sky, the wind, flowers, trees,
birds, animals, stones, rivers and oceans. Realise the oneness of life, the unity of Consciousness.Behold the one homogeneous Self everywhere—in all beings, in all animals, in all plants.
Realise your unity with all. Mix with all. The Parsis, the Americans, the Italians, the
Japanese, the Russians all belong to you. You also belong to them. Unite with all.
Realise first your unity with all the members of your family, then with all the members of
your community, then with all the members of your district, then with all the members of your state,then with all the members of the whole nation, then with all the people of the whole world. If yousucceed in this attempt, then only can you realise your unity or oneness with God.
128UNITY OF CONSCIOUSNESSThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Feel the Divine Presence in all creation. Learn to discriminate between the permanent and
the impermanent. Behold the Self in all beings, in all objects. Names and forms are illusory.
Therefore, sublate them. Feel that there is nothing but the Self. Share what you have—physical,mental, moral and spiritual—with all. Serve the Self in all. Feel, when you serve others, that you areserving your own Self only. Love thy neighbour as thyself. Melt all illusory differences. Remove allbarriers that separate man from man. Mix with all. Embrace all. Destroy the sex-idea and thebody-idea by constantly thinking of the Self or the sexless and bodiless Atman. Fix the mind on theSelf while you work. This is practical Vedanta. This is the essence of the teachings of theUpanishads and the sages of yore. This is real, eternal life in the Atman. Put these teachings into
practice in the daily battle of life. You will then shine as a dynamic Yogi or liberated sage. There isno doubt of this.
You must be a practical Vedantin. Mere theorising and lecturing are only intellectual
gymnastics and lingual warfare. They will not suffice. If Vedanta is not practical, no theory is ofany value. You must put Vedanta into daily practice in every action of yours. Vedanta teachesoneness or unity of the Self. You must radiate love to one and all. The spirit of Vedanta must beingrained in your very cells and tissues, veins, nerves and bones. It must become part and parcel ofyour nature. You must think of unity, speak of unity and act in unity. If you deliver a thrillinglecture on the platform on Vedanta and say, “I am the all; I am the one Self in all; there is nothingbut my Self”, and then show in action the next moment a different attitude of selfishness andseparateness, you will not produce any impression on the minds of the public. You will be called adry Vedantin only. Nobody will care for you.
Adwaita is a fragrance or sweet aroma that emanates from a Vedantin and is wafted to a long
distance. Those who come in contact with a real Vedantin will experience this sweet fragrance.Such a Vedantin need not say, “I am a Vedantin. I practise Vedanta.” If you do not experience thisdelightful Vedantic aroma of oneness or equality in a preacher of Vedanta, know that he is a dryman who prattles something or repeats something like a gramophone. His words will be like emptybullets in the air. They cannot produce any impression on the minds of the hearers.
I reiterate again in order to produce in your mind a deep impression. There is no world. You
are not the body, you are the all-pervading Atman. You are the silent witness. The senses performtheir functions. There is only the Atman everywhere. Feel the indwelling intelligence. When yousee a fruit, say, “This is the one Atman.” See the essence in all forms. Reject the outer sheaths andillusory appearances. This will lead to beholding all names and forms as the one Atman. There is nonecessity of closing the eyes. For this kind of Sadhana, no posture and no closed room are needed.This Sadhana is suitable for the men of the world who are intelligent. This is work combined withJnana. The Self-delight of the Supreme Brahman appears as the mind and the universe. The world isnothing but the mind. The world is a long dream.
I have given you the essence of Vedanta or Jnana Yoga in a nutshell. Digest it. Absorb it.
Assimilate it. Proclaim it boldly everywhere. Become totally fearless. Shine as Brahman. Moveabout with courage, my dear Jyoti! Rejoice always in the Satchidananda Atman within.
129KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRETThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book GLOSSARY
Note:
1. This includes only those Indian terms for which the English equivalents are not indicated
simultaneously (or almost simultaneously) with their occurrence in the text.
2. The meaning of those compound words as are not included in the glossary may be made
out by referring to the separate meanings of their component terms in the glossary.
Adwaita : non-duality
Agnihotra : a fire-offeringApana : the down-going breathApta-Kama : perfected soulAshrama-Bheda : distinction between the different orders of lifeAtma-Jnana : knowledge of the SelfAvatara : an incarnationBandha : a Yogic exerciseBhakti : devotionBrahmacharya : celibacyBrahmamuhurta : the early morning hours most conducive to spiritual practiceBrahman : the Absolute RealityDeva : a celestial beingDharana : concentrationDharma : righteous conductDhyana : meditationDwapara Yuga : the third of the four Hindu time-cyclesEkadasi : the eleventh day of the Hindu lunar fortnightGranthi : knotHimsa : violence, injuryJiva : the individual soulJivanmukta : one who is liberated even while livingJnana Yoga : the Yoga of knowledgeKali Yuga : the last of the four Hindu time-cycles, the present Iron AgeKevala-Jnani : one who is established in the wisdom of pure non-dualismKirtan : singing the Lord’s NameKriya : a Hatha Yogic exerciseKundalini : the primordial cosmic energy located in the individualLila : divine sportMahabhava : highest pitch or consummation of divine love
130GLOSSARYThis is a free e-book from http://www.dlshq.org/ 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
Contact pannir@dlshq.org if you purchased this book Mudra : a Yogic exercise
Mumukshutwa : burning desire for liberationNadi : an astral nerveNirguna : without attributes
Nirvikalpa Samadhi: the highest superconscious state where all mental modifications cease
to exist
Nishkama Bhav : mental attitude wherein there is no desire for the fruit of one’s actions
Niyama : purificatory observancesPara-Vidya : supreme science, the Science of the SoulPrakriti : Mother NaturePrana : the vital force, the life-currentPranayama : breath controlPrarabdha : destinyPratyahara : abstraction of the senses
Raja Yoga: the Yoga of mind-control, the eight-limbed Yoga of Maharshi
Patanjali
Rishi : a seer
Sadguru : the true preceptorSadhana : spiritual practiceSamskara : an impression in the subconscious mind
Sandhya: the daily worship of offering oblations to the sun-god thrice a day—at
sunrise, noon and sunset
Satchidananda : Existence Absolute, Knowledge Absolute, Bliss Absolute
Satsang : company of the holySatya Yuga : the first of the four Hindu time-cyclesShad Sampat : the six qualifications prescribed for a student of VedantaShakta : a follower of the Shakti cultSmarana : remembrance
Sushumna: the chief of the astral tubes in the body running inside the spinal
column
Treta Yuga : the second of the four Hindu time-cycles
Triveni : a place where three holy rivers meetVanaprastha : the forest-dweller, the third of the four Hindu orders of lifeVarnashrama : the division of castes and stages of life in the Hindu religion
Vedanta: end of the Vedas, the school of thought based primarily on the Vedic
Upanishads
Yama : self-restraint; the Lord of Death
131KINGLY SCIENCE KINGLY SECRET