MAY I ANSWER THAT?

By

SRI SWAMI SIVANANDA

SERVE, LOVE, GIVE,
PURIFY, MEDITATE,

REALIZE

So Says

Sri Swami Sivananda

Sri Swami Sivananda

Founder of

The Divine Life Society

A DIVINE LIFE SOCIETY PUBLICATION

First Edition: 1992
Second Edition: 1994

(4,000 copies)

World Wide Web (WWW) Reprint : 1997

WWW site: http://www.rsl.ukans.edu/~pkanagar/divine/

This WWW reprint is for free distribution

©  The Divine Life Trust Society

ISBN 81-7502-104-1

Published By

THE DIVINE LIFE SOCIETY

P.O. SHIVANANDANAGAR—249 192
Distt. Tehri-Garhwal, Uttar Pradesh,

Himalayas, India.

Publishers’ Note

This  book  is  a  compilation  from  the  various  published  works  of  the  holy  Master  Sri

Swami Sivananda, including some of his earliest works extending as far back as the late thirties.

The questions and answers in the pages that follow deal with some of the commonest, but
most  vital,  doubts  raised  by  practising  spiritual  aspirants.    What  invests  these  answers  and
explanations  with  great  value  is  the  authority,  not  only  of  the  sage’s  intuition,  but  also  of  his
personal experience.

Swami Sivananda was a sage whose first concern, even first love, shall we say, was the
spiritual seeker, the Yoga student.  Sivananda lived to serve them; and this priceless volume is
the outcome of that Seva Bhav of the great Master.

We do hope that the aspirant world will benefit considerably from a careful perusal of the
pages  that  follow  and  derive  rare  guidance  and  inspiration  in  their  struggle  for  spiritual
perfection.

May the holy Master’s divine blessings be upon all.

SHIVANANDANAGAR,
JANUARY 1, 1993.              

THE DIVINE LIFE SOCIETY

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

1.  Why should we believe in God ?

Belief in God is an indispensable requisite for every human being. It is a  sine qua non.
Owing  to  the  force  of  Avidya  or  ignorance,  pain  appears  as  pleasure.  The  world  is  full  of
miseries,  troubles,  difficulties  and  tribulations.  The  world  is  a  ball  of  fire.  The  Antahkarana
(mind,  intellect,  ego  and  the  subconscious  mind)  charged  with  Raga  (attachment),  Dvesha
(hatred), anger and jealousy is a blazing furnace. We have to free ourselves from birth, death, old
age, disease and grief. This can be done only by faith in God. There is no other way. Money and
power cannot give us real happiness. Even if we exercise suzerainty over the whole world, we
cannot be free from care, worry, anxiety, fear, disappointment, etc. It is only faith in God and the
consequent God-realization through meditation that can give us real, eternal happiness and free
us from all kinds of fear and worries which torment us at every moment. Faith in God will force
us to think of  Him  constantly  and  to  meditate  on  Him  and  will  eventually  lead  us  on  to  God-
realization.

2.  What is the harm in not believing in God’s existence ?

If  we  have  no  faith  in  God,  we  will  be  born  again  in  this  world  and  will  undergo
considerable miseries. The ignorant, faithless doubting self goes to destruction. He cannot enjoy
the least happiness. Neither this world nor that beyond is there for the doubting self. Those who
have no faith in God do not know what is right and what is wrong. They have lost the power of
discrimination. They are untruthful, proud and egoistic. They are given to excessive greed, wrath
and  lust.  They  hoard  up  money  by  unlawful  means.  They  become  men  of  demoniacal  nature.
They  commit  various  sorts  of  atrocious  crimes.  They  have  no  ideals  for  their  lives.  They  are
thrown into demoniacal wombs. They sink into the lowest depths, deluded birth after birth.

Some  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago  there  lived  a  very  famous  Yogi-Jnani  (a  self-
realized saint) by name Sadasiva Brahmendra Sarasvati  in  Nerur,  near  Karur,  in  the  district  of
Tiruchirapalli in South India. He is the author of Brahma Sutra Vritti and Atma Vidya Vilasa and
various other books. He has done innumerable miracles. Once when he was absorbed in Samadhi
(superconscious state) on the banks of the Cauvery, he was carried away by the flood and thrown
somewhere else. He was deeply buried underneath the sand. Labourers went to plough the fields.
They  hit  against  the  head  of  the  Yogi  and  some  blood  oozed  out.  They  dug  out,  and  to  their
astonishment, they found a Yogi seated in Samadhi.

On another occasion, as an Avadhuta, Sadasiva Brahmendra entered the Zenana (tent) of
a Mohammedan chief naked. The chief was quite enraged at the sage. He cut off one of the arms
of  the  Mahatma  (saint).  Sadasiva  Brahman  walked  away  without  uttering  a  word  and  without
showing any sign of pain. The chief was greatly astonished at this strange condition of the sage.
He  thought  that  this  man  must  be  a  Mahatma,  a  superhuman  being.  He  repented  much  and
followed the sage to apologize. Sadasiva never knew that his arm was cut off. When the chief
narrated  to  the  sage  what  had  happened  in  the  camp,  Sadasiva  excused  the  chief  and  simply
touched his maimed arm. Sadasiva Brahman had a fresh arm. It is the life of this sage that made a
very deep impression in my mind. I came to a very definite conclusion that there is a  sublime
divine life independent of objects and  the  play  of  the  mind  and  the  sense.  The  sage  was  quite

1

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

unconscious of the world. He did not feel a bit when his arm was cut off. He ought to have been
absorbed  in  the  Divine  Consciousness,  he  ought  to  have  been  one  with  the  Divine.  Ordinary
people yell out when there is even a pin-prick in  their  bodies.  When  I  heard  of  the  marvelous
incident in the life of Sage Sadasiva from Apta (realized) persons and when I read in the book, it
gave me a very strong conviction about the Divine Existence and a divine eternal life where all
sorrows  melt,  where  all  desires  are  satisfied  and  one  gets  supreme  bliss,  supreme  peace  and
supreme knowledge.

3.  What is Brahmamuhurta?  Why is it eulogized by the Rishis?

4  a.m.  in  the  morning  is  termed  as  Brahmamuhurta.    Because  it  is  favourable  for
meditation on God or Brahman, it is called Brahmamuhurta.  At this particular hour, the mind is
very calm and serene. It is free from worldly thoughts, worries and anxieties.  The mind is like a
blank  sheet  of  paper  and  comparatively  free  from  worldly  Samskaras.    It  can  be  very  easily
moulded at this time before worldly distractions enter the mind.  Further, the atmosphere also is
charged with more Sattva at this particular time.  There is no bustle and noise outside.

4.  What is your opinion of the Masters of the Himalayas?

There is a great Master of Masters, the Indweller of your heart.  Turn the gaze inwards,
withdraw the Indriyas and seek His help.  Rest in Him.  Identify yourself with Him.  Search Him
in your heart.  Don’t talk to me of these Himalayan Masters in future.  You will be deluded.

5.  What is the difference between Japa and meditation?

Japa is silent repetition of the Name of the Lord.  Meditation is the constant flow of one
idea of God.  When you repeat Om Namo Narayanaya, it is Japa of the Vishnu Mantra.  When
you think of the conch, disc, mace and lotus flower in the hands of Vishnu,  His  ear-rings,  the
crown on His  head,  His  yellow  silken  Pitambar,  etc.,  it  is  meditation.    When  you  think  of  the
attributes of God such as omniscience, omnipotence, etc., it is also meditation.

6.  The Lord’s grace will do everything for me.  Why should I do any Sadhana?

This  is  wrong  philosophy.    God  helps  those  who  help  themselves.    God’s  grace  will
descend only on those persons who exert.  The Lord’s grace will  descend  in  proportion  to  the
degree of surrender.  The more the surrender, the more the grace.  You cannot expect the Lord to
do self-surrender for you.  Be up and doing.  Strive.  Plod.  Persevere.  The Lord will shower His
grace upon you.

Mira  abandoned  everything.    She  renounced  kingdom,  husband,  relatives,  friends  and
property.  She remembered her Lord Krishna whole day and night.  She shed tears of Prem.  She
sang His praise with single-minded devotion.  She gave up food.  Her body got emaciated.  Her
mind was ever absorbed in Lord Krishna.  Only then did Lord Krishna shower His grace upon
her.

2

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

7.  Give me a very simple, but very impressive proof for the existence of the soul.

You say in daily life, “My body”, “My Prana”, “My mind”, “My Indriya”.  This clearly
denotes that the Self or Atman is entirely different from the body, the mind, the Prana and the
Indriyas.  The mind and the body are your servants or instruments.  They are as much outside of
you as these towels, chairs, cups are.  You are holding the body just as you are holding a long
walking stick in your hand.  You are the possessor or proprietor of this body.  The body is your
property or possession.  The body, the senses, the mind, etc., are not the soul, but belong to it.

8.  If God is beyond the reach of the senses, He should be a non-entity, a mere void,
a negative concept, a metaphysical abstraction.  Something beyond the senses?  How could
this be?  I cannot believe such things.  I am a scientist.  I want accurate laboratory proofs.

You  want  laboratory  proofs?    Very  fine  indeed!    You  wish  to  limit  the  illimitable  all-
pervading God in your test-tube, blowpipe and chemicals.  God is the source for your chemicals.
He is the substratum for your atoms, electrons and molecules.  Without Him no atom or electron
will move.  He is the Inner Ruler, Antaryamin.  He is the Niyanta.  Without Him the fire cannot
burn,  the  sun  cannot  shine,  the  air  cannot  move.    Without  Him  you  cannot  see,  cannot  talk,
cannot hear, cannot think.  He is the maker of all scientific laws, the law of gravitation, the law of
cohesion, the law of attraction and repulsion, etc.  He is the law-giver.  Bow to Him with faith
and devotion.  You will have a thorough knowledge of the Science of sciences, Brahma Vidya,
through His grace and you will attain Moksha.

9.  Why do Sadhaks fail to realize God quickly nowadays?

After  attaining  a  certain  stage  of  development,  they  begin  to  dissipate  their  energies  in
preaching, in making disciples, in publishing books.  They become the slaves of name and fame.
That is the reason why they fail to reach the highest goal of life, viz., Brahma Sakshatkar.

10.    How  can  Kundalini  be  awakened?    Would  Japa  alone  be  successful  in

awakening the Kundalini?

Kundalini can be awakened by the practice of Asan, Pranayam, Mudras, Japa and by the

grace of a Guru.  Refer to my book “Kundalini Yoga”.

Yes.  Japa alone is quite sufficient to awaken the Kundalini.  There is no doubt of this.
Sri  Samarth  Ramdas  awakened  the  Kundalini  by  doing  Japa  of  the  Mantra  Om  Sri  Ram  Jaya
Ram, Jaya Jaya Ram thirteen crores of times by standing in the river Godavari, in Takli Village,
near Nasik.

11.  What are the three Doshas or faults in the mind?  Give a concrete illustration.

They  are  Mala  or  impurities  such  as  lust,  anger  and  greed,  Vikshepa  or  tossing  of  the

mind or mental oscillation, and Avarana or the veil of ignorance.

3

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

There is a muddy lake covered with moss.  The wind is blowing hard.  Now, the lake is
the mind.  The muddy condition represents Mala.  The agitation of the waters that is set up by the
wind corresponds to the Vikshepa in the mind set up by the vibration of Prana.  The moss that
covers the surface of the water represents the veil of ignorance.

12.  How to make the mind subtle and pure?

Do  Japa.    Do  selfless  service.    Pray  to  God  from  the  bottom  of  your  heart  (Antarika).
Have Satsang.  Meditate.  Read the Gita and the Upanishads.  Live alone.  Live in seclusion for
six  months.    Take  Sattvic  food.    Give  up  meat,  fish,  eggs,  liquors,  chillies,  oil,  black  sugar,
onions and garlic.

13.  What is the difference between Bhakti and Jnana?

Bhakti  is  devotion.    It  is  a  means  to  the  end  which  is  attainment  of  Jnana.    People  of
emotional temperament are fit for this path.  It demands self-surrender or Atma-nivedan.  It is the
cat-Yoga.  The kitten cries aloud and the mother cat runs at once to catch it by the mouth.  So
also, the devotee cries aloud like Draupadi and Gajendra and the Lord Krishna runs immediately
to rescue him and shower His grace.  The Bhakti Marga demands only sincere, intense devotion,
blind faith and strong conviction as Prahlad had.  There is no necessity for learning.  Illiterate
people like Tukaram who could not sign even their names had realized God.  There is no need for
vast learning or study.  A Bhakta wants to eat sugar-candy.  He wants to sit by the side of the
Lord.

Jnana  is  the  Yoga  of  self-expansion.    It  demands  self-reliance.    Only  people  of  an
intellectual temperament with Vichara Sakti or the power of discrimination and ratiocination are
fit for the path of Jnana or knowledge.  It is the monkey-Yoga.  The young monkey does not cry,
but  itself  clings  tenaciously  to  the  body  of  its  mother  wherever  the  mother  runs.    This  Yoga
demands a vast study of Vedantic literature, a sharp intellect, bold understanding, gigantic will
and courage.  A Jnani wants to become an embodiment of sugar-candy, instead of tasting sugar-
candy.  A Jnani wants to become identical with the Existence (Eka Aikyam).

14.  Are Jnana and Bhakti conflicting with each other?

My answer is emphatically “No”.  There is, in fact,  an  inter-relationship  between  these
two,  the  one  supplementing  the  other.    Bhakti  is  not  at  all  antagonistic  to  Jnana.    There  is
undoubtedly a mutual dependence between the two.  Both lead to the same destination.

You  cannot  entirely  separate  Bhakti  from  Jnana.  When  Bhakti  matures,  it  becomes
transmuted into Jnana.  A real Jnani is a devotee of Lord Hari, Lord Krishna, Lord Rama, Lord
Siva,  Durga,  Sarasvati,  Lakshmi,  Lord  Jesus  and  Buddha.    He  is  a  Samarasa  Bhakta.    Some
ignorant people think that a Jnani is a dry man and has no devotion.  This is a sad mistake.  A
Jnani has a very, very large heart.  Go through the hymns of Sri Sankaracharya and try to gauge
the depth of his devotion.  Go through the writings of Sri Appayya Dikshitar and measure the
magnanimous depths of his unbounded devotion.

4

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Swami Ram Tirth was a Jnani.   Was  he  not  a  Bhakta  of  Lord  Krishna?    If  a  Vedantin
excludes  Bhakti,  remember  he  has  not  really  grasped  and  understood  Vedanta.    The  same
Nirguna  Brahman  manifests  with  a  little  Maya  in  a  comer  as  Saguna  Brahman  for  the  pious
worship of His devotees.

Bhakti is not divorced from Jnana.  On the contrary, Jnana intensifies Bhakti.  He who
has a knowledge of Vedanta is well established in his devotion.  He is steady and firm.  Some
ignorant people say that if a Bhakta studies Vedanta, he will lose his devotion.  This is wrong.
Study of Vedanta is an auxiliary to increase and develop one’s devotion.  The devotion of a man
proficient in Vedantic literature is well-grounded.  Bhakti and Jnana are like the two wings of a
bird to help one to fly unto Brahman, to the summit of Mukti.

15.  Is it advisable to do meditation  after  meal  at  night?    A  Grihastha  is  so  much

disturbed in the evening that he scarcely gets time to meditate.

After a sumptuous meal, generally, people feel drowsy.  You may imagine that you are
meditating, but it may be purely sleep in a sitting posture.  If you follow the rules of Mitahara and
take meals before 7 p.m., you can sit and meditate from 9 p.m. to 10 p.m.

Meditation at night, a second sitting, is absolutely necessary.  If you do not have sufficient
time at night, you can meditate even for a few minutes, say, ten or fifteen, before going to bed.
By so doing, the spiritual Samskaras will increase.  The spiritual Samskaras are valuable assets or
priceless treasures for you.  Further, you will have no bad dreams at night.  The divine thoughts
will be carried during sleep.  The good impressions will be there.

16.    I  find  it  very  difficult  to  keep  up  Brahmacharya.  Suddenly  I  fall  in  the  pit

foolishly.  Actually I am crying, but doing the same act like a dog.  What is to be done?

Fast.  Do Japa of a Mantra for three hours daily.  Read the Gita, one chapter daily.  Sleep
in a separate room.  Keep the mind fully occupied.  Divert the mind.  Entertain noble, sublime
thoughts.  Have Satsang.  Do simple Pranayam with mild Kumbhaks twenty times daily.  Do a lot
of physical work also.  Take simple food.  Think that there is neither sex nor sexual Vasana in
Atma.  Meditate on Atma.

17.  I am in earnest search of a Guru who can emphatically say that he has realized
Brahman or the eternal Truth or God.  Can you give trace of such a man?  May I take the
liberty to ask you whether you have realized Brahman?

The queries you have asked are quite common to all sincere aspirants in the spiritual path.

Suppose I tell you that a certain “X” is a realized soul, how can you verify my statement

and how far will you be benefited by him?

5

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Realized souls  are  not  rare.    Ordinary  ignorant-minded  persons  cannot  easily  recognize
them.    Only  a  few  persons  who  are  pure  and  are  embodiments  of  all  virtuous  qualities  can
understand realized souls and they only will be benefited by their company.

There  is  no  use  of  running  hither  and  thither  in  search  of  realized  men.    Even  if  Lord
Krishna  remains  with  you,  He  cannot  do  anything  for  you,  unless  you  are  fit  to  receive  Him.
Realize  this  point  well  and  purify  yourself  by  Nishkama  Karma  Yoga,  charity,  concentration,
meditation, Japa, Brahmacharya and control of senses.

Testing a Guru is highly difficult.  Don’t use your intellect here.  Have faith.  The real
aspirant is quite free from such questions and doubts.  You will be miraculously helped if you
believe in my words.

18.  Is it too much for a teacher to make his followers great?

The  question  assumes  that  the  teacher  has  attachment  for  his  disciple  in  preference  to
others.  If he had that, he would not be a spiritual teacher, because the first qualification for a
spiritual man is conquest of attachment.  The fact is that out of millions, one is found to have the
qualification and it is he who comes up as ‘the great’—the superman.  Each such great man is
surrounded by men who are attracted by his inherent charm.  But those who are so surrounding
are not the people who are qualified to be masters.  They are just ordinary men and no more.

19.  A rather unusual lady studied for ten years under the strictest Yogic discipline
with some of the “greatest of all great Yogis” and finally came to the conclusion ... that it is
all a hoax and a mirage.

From your account of her, she was not qualified to benefit by contact with anyone, even if
that one had the spiritual greatness of Lord Buddha himself.  The one thing needed for spiritual
progress  is  perseverance.    She  was  stuffing  herself  with  the  writings  of  many,  each  of  whom
pointed a different path.  One who wants to sink a well must go on digging in one place till one
strikes water.  If he digs pits in a hundred places, each not more than 5 feet deep, he will not have
dug a well.  That was her case.  What value can be attached to her opinions?

20.  Why is so much sanctity attached to a pilgrimage, and not to a mere sight-seeing

trip or an official tour?

It is because the very idea of “going on a pilgrimage” prepares your mind to be in a highly
receptive mood, in a highly prayerful mood.  It shuts out the worldly grooves in the mind.  You
leave the cloak of your official life in your office room.  You abandon the cumbersome apparel
of  social  life  when  you  leave  your  town  or  city.    Even  if  you  travel  with  your  family,  you
gradually  begin  to  look  upon  the  family  members  as  co-pilgrims  and  not  so  much  as  personal
relations.  If you are alone, perhaps you live completely in a spiritual world of your own, with
little  or  no  family  cares,  worries  and  anxieties.    This  is  the  mental  condition  that  is  most
conducive to the greatest reception of the spiritual vibrations  that  surround  you  on  all  sides  in
holy regions like Uttarakhand.  The pilgrim who goes as a pilgrim is conscious that he is engaged

6

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

upon  a  sacred  mission  of  gathering  spiritual  impressions  and  will  therefore  gain  the  greatest
blessings by a pilgrimage.  He will be a thoroughly changed man when he returns from the Yatra.

21.  How are people benefited by a pilgrimage?

This  question  has  to  be  answered  by  each  pilgrim  for  himself.    The  spiritual  benefit
always depends entirely upon the heart’s faith.  Faith is the life-breath of the spirit in man.  No
spiritual endeavour can be fruitful without it.  With it, no spiritual achievement is impossible.  If
a  pilgrim  heartily  believed,  was  convinced,  and  was  certain-at-heart  that  all  his  sins  would  be
washed  away,  that  he  would  attain  Moksha  and  get  beyond  the  wheel  of  Samsara,  there  is
absolutely no reason why it should not actually prove to be so.  A pilgrimage like Badri-Yatra
can wash off all your sins and enable you to take great strides towards the Great Goal (cid:190)
 Self-
realization (cid:190)
 if you have firm faith in its glory.  But, remember, the test of this faith is what you
are after you return from the pilgrimage; if, after the pilgrimage, you prove that you have been
thoroughly  purged  of  all  your  sins,  that  all  the  evil  Samskaras  have  been  washed  away  by  the
holy  waters  of  the  rivers  you  have  bathed  in,  and  that  you  have  been  filled  with  the  spiritual
vibrations  of  the  sublime  atmosphere  you  have  sojourned  in,  and  if  you  live  a  pure  life  of
righteousness, devotion, truth, love and purity, you have certainly been liberated.  The pilgrimage
has served its supreme purpose.

Some pilgrims do rise to such spiritual heights, though their number may be small, and

though they may not advertise their achievements.

22.    I  read  your  article  in  “My  Magazine”:  “Fly  from  the  company  of  worldly-
minded persons.  Those who talk of worldly affairs will pollute you.  Your mind will waver.
Run,  run,  run  quickly  to  solitary  places  like  Rishikesh.  You  will  be  safe  in  the  spiritual
path”.  May I come to you and lead the life of a Sannyasin?

Do not be hasty.  Think well.  Look before you leap.  Mere emotion will not do in the
spiritual  line.    The  above  instructions  are  for  those  who  were  already  doing  some  kind  of
Sadhana.    They  will  have  to  go  in  for  seclusion  for  advanced  practices.    It  will  be  better  for
beginners  like  you  to  perform  Nishkama  Karma  Yoga  for  three  years  in  the  world  by
disinterestedly serving the sick and the aged persons.

Suppose you remain with me as a Sannyasin, have you got the real strength of heart to
face your mother when she weeps bitterly before you with a broken heart?  Will you stick to this
line if your father comes and threatens you?  Will you be unaffected in your mind if a young lady
tempts you?  Will you be steady if you are affected by a disease?  Are you prepared to sacrifice
this  body  and  life  in  the  cause  of  Truth?    Have  you  understood  the  glory  and  importance  of
Sannyasa and seclusion?  Have you got an idea of the difficulties that Sannyasins have to face?
Are you prepared to go from door to door and live on Bhiksha?  How will you spend the whole
day and night when you live in seclusion?  Just decide all these points before you come to me.  If
you are sure that you are fit for Sannyasa, you can come here.  I will serve you and help you well.
I will take care of your spiritual welfare.  I will make you a king of kings.  There is nothing so

7

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

pleasant  as  the  life  of  renunciation.    It  is  best  suited  for  quick  Self-realization.    Glory  to  all
Sannyasins!

the  Brahman,  I(cid:190)

23.    Why  should  I(cid:190)

the  Cosmic  Consciousness,  the  Existence
without another, the Infinite, the All-pervading and the Omniscient, at all project Prakriti?
Why must I be bound  by  the  laws  of  Prakriti  and  be  limited  by  the  phenomena  of  time,
space, causation and substance, and above all, why must I get involved in this process of
evolution and involution?

The eye cannot perceive itself.  A man cannot stand on his own shoulders.  Even so, all
enquiry into the  Ultimate  Cause,  the  causeless  Cause  of  all  creation,  is  first  confronted  with  a
formidable wall of primordial ignorance.  He who annihilates his ego to nothing at this point, and
who  thus  obtains  the  grace  of  Isvara,  gets  through  this  wall  and  enters  the  Kingdom  of  the
Infinite.  Then he knows.  But this knowledge cannot be communicated to others, as this great
wall is obstructing others from perceiving the Truth.  Therefore the ancient sage termed it an Ati-
prasna or transcendental question.

Suffice it to know that God has created this world in order to enable you to evolve and
realize the Self, in order to serve all and love all as His manifestations.  The dacoit of ignorance
has kidnapped man from his palace of Self-awareness and brought him to a thick forest; when the
man wakes up, he does not brood over how he came there, but tries to get out of the forest.  Even
so, the earnest Sadhak tries to break the chain of transmigration by attaining Self-realization.

24.  Why does not the benevolent, kind and all-merciful God help the righteous man

and give him happiness?  Why does He leave him to the mercies of his Purva Karma?

Karma is likened to the wheel.  It has to work out; because the force that set it in motion
has to be spent.  It is a cycle of action and reaction.  Just as the arrow once discharged from the
bow cannot be withdrawn, even if the hunter feels that he has aimed at a wrong target, Prarabdha
Karma, the fruit of those Karmas performed in previous births that have come up for experience
in this present birth, cannot be annulled.

How then does God help His devotee?  The all-merciful God does help His devotee by
strengthening his will-power, his power of endurance, to bear the Karma-Phala with a cheerful
countenance.  The devotee is certainly not left to the mercy of his Purva Karma; he is beautifully
clothed in the protective shield of His grace.  Just as in the worst winter and violent storm, you
remain  unaffected  in  your  own  house  and  in  your  warm  clothing,  the  devotee  (though  to  the
onlookers he is poor, sick or suffering) does not feel that he is suffering at all and is ever happy
and blissful in His remembrance.

25.  A man doing a wrong thing argues that he is doing it because of his Karma; and
he does not even try not to do it, because it gives him immediate happiness.  How to impress
upon him not to do it?

8

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Karma does not compel a man to do wrong actions.  Samskara does, to a certain extent.
But  God  has  bestowed  free  will  on  man,  with  which  to  make  or  mar  his  career.    Man  has  no
Bhoga-Svatantrata or the freedom to enjoy or suffer, which factor is governed by Karma.  But, he
has got Karma-Svatantrata or freedom to do good or evil.  He can substitute good Samskaras in
place of the old vicious Samskaras by Vichara-sakti, will-power and continued practice of good
actions.

That evil seems to give immediate happiness is the greatest temptation and the greatest
obstacle  to  the  cultivation  of  virtues;  and  it  can  be  removed  only  by  discrimination  and
experience.    Contemplation  over  the  ultimate  and  permanent  damage  done  to  the  very  soul  of
man by the evil actions, and the harm he is causing to the entire society itself by his evil, ought to
compel a man to desist from evil action(cid:190)
however pleasant it might appear superficially.  There
is  no  short-cut  to  this  really  serious  problem;  the  wicked  heart  will  not  yield  easily.    And
therefore our ancients have exalted Satsang.  Constant association with the wise and spiritually
evolved persons alone can remove these wrong notions from the mind of the wicked one.

26.    I  am  a  stranger  whom  you  would  never  have  dreamt  of  coming  across,  but
please do not detest me for being a woman.  I am only too eager to taste the happiness of
spiritual  life.    Please,  Swamiji,  have  some  consideration  even  for  a  woman  and  tell  me
whether I am to be blessed with such happiness in my future, and if so, when that will be.

It is said that one must have a proper Guru and I do not know where to hunt for one

who would satisfy my appetite soon.  Can you help me?

Did you yourself have a Guru and who was he?  Tell me all about him, please, if I

am not being too bold in asking this.  Is he, or was he, a Satguru?

May I know whether you can be called a Guru or a Satguru?

I am extremely pleased to note that you are too eager to taste the happiness of spiritual
life.  You have good spiritual Samskaras.  Protect them.  You can realize that spiritual happiness
through regular practices.

I do not detest anybody.  I revere a woman as my own Self.  Woman is a manifestation of
Sakti.  I adore her as Durga or Mother Kali.  Though ladies are styled as Abalas (those without
strength), they are dynamic forces on this earth.  Religion is maintained through them alone.  The
devotional element is ingrained in Hindu ladies.  They have innate devotion.  If they determine,
they can realize God very quickly.

Don’t you like to become a Mira?  If your mind is really turned towards God-realization,
if you are sincere and earnest in your spiritual practices, you will attain  the  spiritual  bliss  in  a
short  time.    Cheer  yourself  up.    Be  bold.    Stand  up.    Assert.    Recognize.    Realize.    Taste  the
spiritual happiness.

You can find your Guru at your door if you really want him.  Sincere aspirants are rare.
Yes, I have my Guru.  Space will not permit here to tell all about him.  I am neither a Guru nor a
Satguru.    I  take  great  delight  in  serving  others.    Surely  I  shall  serve  you  and  share  with  you
whatever I have.  I shall clear your doubts, put you in the spiritual path.

9

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

27.    Is  it  dangerous  to  practice  Pranayam  without  the  assistance  of  a  Guru  or

teacher?

You can practice ordinary Pranayam exercises without the help of a Guru.  There is no
danger  in  practicing  Pranayam,  Asan,  etc.,  if  you  are  careful,  if  you  use  your  common-sense.
People are unnecessarily alarmed.  There is danger in everything if you are careless.  If you are
careless in getting down the steps of a staircase, you will fall down and break your legs.  If you
are careless when you walk in the busy parts of a city, you will be crushed by the motor-cars.  If
you  are  careless  when  you  purchase  a  ticket  at  the  railway  station,  you  will  lose  your  money-
purse.  If you are careless in dispensing mixtures, you will kill the patients by giving a poison or
a  wrong  medicine  or  by  administering  a  medicine  in  over-doses.    Even  so,  when  you  practice
Pranayam,  you  will  have  to  be  careful  about  your  diet.    You  should  avoid  over-loading,  you
should take light, easily digestible and nutritious food.  You should be moderate in copulation.
You  should  not  go  beyond  your  capacity  in  retaining  the  breath.    You  should  first  practice
inhalation and exhalation only (without retention of breath) for one or two months.  You should
gradually increase the ratio from 1:4:2 to 16:64:32.  You should exhale very very slowly.  If these
rules are observed, there is no danger at all in the practice of Pranayam.

A Guru is necessary if you want to practice Kumbhak or retention of breath for a long
time and unite Apana with Prana.  The books written by realized Yogins can guide you if you are
not able to get a Guru.  But it is better to have a Guru by your side.  Or you can get the lessons
from him and practice them at home.  You can keep regular correspondence with him.  You can
retain the breath from 1/2 to 1 or 2 minutes without any difficulty or danger.  If you cannot get a
realized Yogi, you can approach senior students of Yoga.  They also can help you.

28.  Does purity of food lead to purity of mind?  Is non-vegetarian food not Sattvic?
We have in the Mahabharata instances of people taking the meat of goats sacrificed to the
Lord.

Yes, purity of food leads to purity of mind. Aharasuddhau Satvasuddhih.  Take a dose of
champagne and sit for meditation.  Take a dose of orange-juice and sit for meditation.  You will
know the difference.  Different foods exercise different influences on different compartments in
the brain.  By taking champagne, meat and garlic, the mind will be confused and will become
restless when you sit for meditation.  By taking milk and fruits, you will get good concentration.
Our Rishis lived on fruits and milk.  The Chhandogya Upanishad says, “Pure food leads to purity
of mind and then one attains Moksha”.  You should have dietetic discipline.

Non-vegetarian food is not Sattvic.  It is not good for a seeker. Live for a month on milk
and  fruits  and  see.    Give  up  meat  for  one  month  and  see.    Let  us  be  practical.    Practical
experience will tell you that meat-eating is bad for the mind.

29.  Which is better?  To lead a family life or to become a recluse?

10

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

You cannot renounce the world all at once.  The world is a vast university.  Nature is the
best  teacher.    In  the  world  you  can  develop  virtues  like  mercy,  tolerance,  etc.    You  cannot
develop them if you remain in a cave.  The world is the best teacher.  Gradually, when you have
evolved,  you  can  renounce.    Guru  Nanak  remained  in  the  world  with  two  or  three  children.
There is nothing wrong in the world.  Prayer will remove all obstacles.

30.  It is rumoured in certain quarters that friendship with Sadhus and Sannyasins
can do and undo the well-being of a person.  If a person hurts the feelings of some God-
realized saint, then it is said that the saint may curse and thus herald a bundle of miseries
for him. How far is this true?

The company of Sadhus and Sannyasins is always covetable provided they are of sterling
character.    If  this  singular  qualification  is  traceable  in  them,  they  are  worthy  of  adoration  and
respect.  They can never be a source of trouble to anyone.

Contact  with  Sadhus  and  Sannyasins  of  true  worth  can  never  mar  the  progress  or  the
personal  interests  of  people.    The  Sadhus  help  people  to  mould  themselves  on  right  ethical
principles.    Their  blessings  are  an  invaluable  asset  to  the  latter.    Satsang  with  Sadhus  and
Sannyasins overhauls the vicious Samskaras that the worldly-minded people are naturally prone
to.

not to protect him from dangers or save him from dishonour(cid:190)

A God-realized saint never curses others even though he is provoked to the extreme, but
simply prays to the Almighty(cid:190)
but
to  bestow  Jnana,  light,  purity  and  illumination  on  his  opponents.    He  never  hurts  others  even
though he is hurt.  He simply forgives and forgets.  He remains oblivious of any wrong done to
him.    A  true  God-realized  saint  finds  his  own  beloved  Deity  in  the  thief,  the  debauchee,  the
rogue, the murderer, the assailant, the ant, the dog, the Pariah, the Brahmin, the tree, the stone,
the scorpion, in fact, in the entire living and non-living creation.  He is at-one with all.  When
such is the case, when he sees his own Self everywhere, whom can he curse?

Remember that a Sadhu or a Sannyasin is not God-realized if he, curses others for any
reason.  It is true that the curse of any pious man, not necessarily a Sadhu or a Sannyasin, readily
acts on the person towards whom it is directed under pressure of mental hurt or physical harm.

31.  When the grace of Guru and God is there, why is the mind still not controlled?

There must be Purushartha also.  Only when you do Purushartha, the grace will come.  A
professor will not answer the questions for you and make you pass.  The Gita says, “Uddharet
Atmanatmanam”.  One should raise oneself.  Grace only helps one to raise oneself.  Everybody
should work out his  own  salvation.    You  may  ask,  “What  is  grace  then?”.    If  an  aspirant  gets
letters  from  his  preceptor,  clearing  his  doubts,  that  is  grace.    If  an  aspirant  comes  here,  takes
Ganges  bath  and  hears  the  lectures  here,  that  is  grace.    Many  people  are  thirsting,  even
croropathis (those who possess crores of rupees) are thirsting to come and bathe in the Ganges,
but all do not get a chance of coming and having their wish fulfilled.  If good books are available
for Svadhyaya (study), it is grace.  If one enjoys good health for doing Sadhana, that is grace. If

11

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

God  so  wishes,  He  can  give  Mukti  to  the  whole  world  in  an  instant;  but  He  does  not  do  so.
Grace descends only when there is Purushartha.

32.  Why has God created the world?

Ask God why He has created this world!  Attain wisdom of the Self.  Then you will know
why God created the world.  You cannot understand it with your intellect.  You can understand it
only with intuition.

For the sake of sport, God created the world. Lokavattu Lila Kaivalyam.  Creation of the
world has a purpose.  Just as we cannot have a sun without rays, similarly, we cannot have God
without  the  world  process.    The  world  is  like  His  rays.    It  is  His  Svabhava,  nature.    Just  as  a
juggler produces something and makes it disappear, so also, God produces this world and makes
it  disappear.    God  is  omnipotent.    To  ask  why  He  created  the  world  is  an  Ati-prasna,  a
transcendental question.  We will be only wasting time by discussing it.  Before asking about the
world, ask about yourself.  Know who you are.  Then you will know everything.

33.  Is there a remedy for the fall of ethical laws and standards due to the industrial

revolution?

The industrial revolution does not compel anyone to lower the moral standard.  No doubt,
it might have facilitated this fall to some extent.  The real mischief was done by the misleaders of
mankind  who  deliberately  exalted  material  values  over  spiritual  values.    It  is  never  too  late  to
mend.    Even  now,  if  the  heart  of  man  be  cleansed  of  the  dross  of  selfishness  and  self-
aggrandizement, and righteousness enthroned in it, the moral standard can be kept high in spite
of the most spectacular industrial development.

34.    Why  does  man  not  remember  death  and  cease  forthwith  from  sinful  deeds

keeping the transience of earthly life in view?

Every man has not sprung up all on a sudden as a man.  The Jiva, right from the very first
ushering into the world, continues to undergo the cycle of births and deaths not in tens, hundreds
or thousands, but in lakhs. It actually carries with it the Samskaras right from its very first birth
up to the birth current, i.e., under enjoyment.  The unenjoyed or residual Samskaras continue till
they are completely fried in toto by Atma Jnana.  The very forgetfulness of death by man, though
he sees countless deaths daily, indicates the nescience that has developed in him to avoid seeing
the  face  of  Truth.    The  experiences  that  he  has  gained  thus  far,  i.e.,  up  to  the  moment  of
consideration, are quite insufficient to drag his attention towards the eternal truth which is God.
A day will certainly dawn in the life of every individual on this earth, not necessarily in this very
birth itself, when he will, by some rare merit, through Satsang with Mahatmas, devotion to Guru,
or God’s grace, tune in to the Ultimate by gradual evolution.

The  sinful  deeds  which  men  commit  are  mainly  due  to  ignorance.    When  ignorance
vanishes once and for all by performance of good and selfless deeds, Japa, Svadhyaya, etc., or by
Guru Kripa, the final goal ever remains in view.  Commission of vicious deeds indicates that the

12

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Jiva is not yet an evolved one and that he is to gain more and more experiences of the world and
undergo repeated and continual refinement from grossness.  For the disappearance of ignorance
and firm remembrance of God, there is no way more powerful than to encounter the kicks, blows
and knocks of the world that may greet one unawares.

35.  What standards should be adopted to measure true greatness?

The  true  greatness  of  man  is  to  be  measured  not  by  the  amount  of  wealth  nor  by  the
number of bungalows which are had or by the exercise of personal influence, but by the degree of
selflessness, all-embracive outlook, generosity, liberal views, cosmic benefaction, self-sacrifice,
egoless, self-effacing nature, grade of perception of unity in diversity, humanitarian services, etc.
A truly great man is pious, spiritually elevated, magnanimous and noble-hearted.  He can never
have a thought for himself and he ever prefers the welfare of humanity casting aside all petty,
selfish  and  personal  interests.    He  ever  prays  for  the  welfare  of  humanity.    Where  there  is  an
open, unconstricted, expansive and large heart, there lies true greatness.

36.  Who is a righteous man?

A righteous man is he who is pure in thought, word and deed and who observes Yama
and Niyama to the very letter.  He ever moves astray for the sake of paltry gains and selfish ends.
He  is  ever  pious,  God-fearing,  Self-centered  and  selfless.    He  has  cosmic  vision  and  a  broad
outlook.    He  is  equanimous  and  tolerant  towards  all.    He  is  a  mine  of  all  virtues  like  charity,
nobility, sincerity, humility, renunciation, serenity, simplicity and so on.  No egoism, no lust, no
greed, no crooked-mindedness, no vanity can find a place in him.  The righteous man is ever the
object of adoration of all.  There will be no enemies to him at all, for he loves all friends and foes
equally.

37.  How can a person perpetuate the period of youth?

The  Yogic  method  excels  all  other  methods.    It  is  the  best  and  the  cheapest  of  all
prevalent systems of treatment.  Take to intense Pranayam and Asans.  Both these help a lot in
preserving  Veerya  (semen)  and  converting  the  vital  energy  into  Ojas.    Practice  Sirshasan,
Sarvangasan,  Matsyasan,  Halasan,  Paschimottanasan,  Padahastasan  and  Yoga  Mudra  coupled
with Bhastrik Pranayam.  Practice Pranayam till the stage of Kevala Kumbhak is reached.  When
there is no necessity either to breathe in or to breathe out, Veerya becomes steady;  that is, there
will be no discharge or emission in any form.  The Ayurvedic preparation “Chyavanaprash” is a
wonderful one in enabling the regular user to preserve youth for a very long time.

38.  In an article in “Siva’s Treasure” entitled “Are you really qualified?”  you write
under  Para  III,  “If  a  thing  is  refused  to  him  (the  Sadhak),  he  should  not  aspire  for  it
again”.    Does  this  statement  not  advocate  a  false  sense  of  self-satisfaction  and  defeatist
mentality?  Please reconcile the discrepancy and oblige.

“If a thing is refused to him (the Sadhak), he should not aspire for it again.”

13

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Read  this  statement  again  and  again  till  it  suffuses  your  entire  being,  till  the  proper
substance of it is totally realized by yourself.  Then only you will appreciate the grand truth to
imbibe  its  true  spirit.    “Neither  ask  nor  reject”  should  be  the  motto  of  an  ideal  Sadhak.    He
should not have any special craving for any particular object, however dearest and cherished it
be.    Whatever  comes  by  chance  without  any  self-effort  can  be  had,  provided  that  it  does  not
degrade the individual from the moral standards.  He should not develop any attachment to any
object lest he should suffer mentally when the object is weaned away from him or refused to him
by the will of the Lord.  Everything comes and goes as per His sweet will.  Whether one strives
for an object or not when something is  due,  it  certainly  befalls  to  one’s  lot  of  its  own  accord.
Aspirants should cultivate mental detachment and indifference towards good and evil, happiness
and misery, love and hatred and all sorts of pairs of opposites.  Such mental equanimity can be
acquired by Atma-Vichara (self-enquiry), study of sacred scriptures, Satsang with Mahatmas, etc.
Self-sacrifice,  self-contentment  and  self-denial  are  what  are  required  in  the  spiritual  field  for
progress.  It is no defeatist mentality if the Sadhak rests satisfied with his ordained lot without
yielding  himself  even  mentally  to  the  temptations  which  he  previously  used  to  enjoy.    He  is
certainly not the “fox that remarked that the grapes were sour when he could not reach to have
them”.    By  voluntary  self-denial  and  dispassion  or  by  keeping  equanimity  when  something
pleasing  does  not  fall  to  one’s  share,  tremendous  will-power  accumulates.    It  is  therefore  a
necessity to keep balance of mind in all states of working consciousness.

39.  What is Nadi Suddhi in its technical sense?  How to feel that one has attained

perfect Nadi Suddhi?

Nadi Suddhi means purification of the nerves (Nadis).  Nerve is not the correct English

term for Nadi.  There is no appropriate word for Nadi in English.

Complete  fast,  preferably  without  any  liquid  or  solid  food,  practice  of  Asans  and
Pranayam, and intense physical exercise(cid:190)
all go a long way in the elimination of fat and other
unwanted  matters  and  in  the  overhauling  of  the  system  to  confer  the  benefit  of  Nadi  Suddhi.
Asans and Pranayam can purify the nerves, if done with the correct technique.

When one attains Nadi Suddhi, the body becomes light.  Stool becomes scanty.  There is
agility  in  movement  and  activity  in  demeanour.    No  trace  of  slothfulness  or  indolence  can  be
detected.    While  walking,  the  body  appears  to  be  floating  in  the  air.    The  tone  of  the  voice
changes from hoarseness or gruffness to mellifluence.  Hopping, jumping and dancing while at
work  can  be  observed  in  one  endowed  with  Nadi  Suddhi.  Something  inexpressible  forces  the
person to do this and to achieve something grand in his lifetime.

40.  What are the best and the worst methods to retaliate against a wrong done to us

for no fault of ours?

Whether a wrong is done on some basis or not, it is not to be retaliated against in any way
if one wants real moral and spiritual strength and the Lord’s grace.  Calmly bear the wrong done
to you without the slightest mental upset or loss of psychic equilibrium.  Do good to the man that
does harm.  Bless that man that curses you.  Pray for the well-being of the man that beleaguers

14

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

you.  Study the lives of Jaya Deva, Shams Tabriez, Jesus Christ, Gauranga and other saints.  The
Lord Himself protects His devotees if they surrender themselves totally unto Him, pouring forth
prayers unto Him like Draupadi or Gajendra.  Do not degrade yourself by resorting to retaliation
in any way.  Adherence to violence even in thought just to satisfy the lower mind debases the
individual spiritually.

The best method to retaliate against a wrong done without any reasonable ground is by
way of offering a spiritual treatise like the Gita or the Ramayana to the opponent and praying for
his gaining the knowledge of the Self and avoiding the evil ways which are due to his ignorance
of the essential unity of all creation.  Observe silence and indifference with heart-moving prayers
unto the Lord.

41.  Does the mental equilibrium of an advanced Yogi get affected when attacked by

some serious disease?  How does he react on such occasions?

Never.    If  there  is  any  thought  of  the  body  or  the  disease  or  the  bodily  affliction  or
something that cannot be tolerated by the fleshy frame, remember that he is no advanced Yogi or
saint or Sannyasin.  He who has no thought of himself or the surroundings or the world, he who
is centered in his own Self or his beloved Ishta Devata or gracious Guru, and he who is entirely
oblivious  of  limitations  of  any  sort,  and  identifies  himself  with  the  limitless,  diseaseless,
unconditioned, all-pervasive Brahman, is a true and advanced Yogi or Bhakta or Jnani; and not
otherwise.

He  can  have  no  match  in  the  whole  world  in  the  matter  of  utter  indifference  either
towards  his  disease  or  towards  his  limited,  perishable  body  or  the  whole  world.    He  always
remains  in  his  own  Self  and  he  never  loses  his  balance  under  any  circumstance.    He  firmly
believes that he is the Infinite, the Absolute Brahman.  He firmly believes that death awaits all
and  snatches  away  everyone  at  one  time  or  the  other  and  that  the  six  Urmis(cid:190) Shoka,  Moha,
Kshut, Pipasa, Jara and Mrityu(cid:190)
are but common to all the Jivas, not necessarily mankind, and
that he is the deathless, imperishable and eternal Brahman.  Hence there can be no mental upset
for him even amidst crucial tests.

42.  Was Srimad Bhagavad Gita actually recited by Lord Krishna in the battlefield

or is it the imagination of the poet?

Yes.    There  is  no  doubt  about  the  Gita  having  been  recited  by  Lord  Krishna  in  the
battlefield.  It is not a mere composition of Chiranjivi (eternally living) Vyasa.  Recall to mind
the following two Slokas which can be found in the Gita Mahatmya:

Gita Sugeeta Kartavya Kimanyaih Sastravistaraih
Ya Svayam Padmanabhasya Mukhapadmadvinissruta

Bharatamritasarvasvam Vishnorvaktradvinissrutam
Gitagangodakam Peetva Punarjanma Na Vidyate

15

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

The  Gita  is  not  a  human  composition  at  all.    Have  the  conviction  as  such,  without  the
usual  questioning  intellect.    Remember  all  the  Avatara  Purushas  like  Sri  Sankara  and  Sri
Ramanuja who had written commentaries on the Gita.  Lord Krishna Himself says to one of His
lady-devotees  named  Lilabai  that  He  and  the  Gita  are  identical  and  that  worship  of  the  one  is
adoration of the other.  Study Slokas 68 to 71 of the Eighteenth Chapter of the Gita to infuse in
yourself the necessary faith and love towards the holy scriptures.

43.    Would  you  kindly  suggest  some  effective  methods  for  conversion  and

sublimation of the sexual energy into spiritual energy or Ojas?

Observe strict continence in thought, word and deed.  Give up thinking useless and vain
thoughts.  Keep balance of mind in all conditions and circumstances, contemplating the Divine.
Practice  Sirshasan,  Sarvangasan  and  Oordhva  Padmasan,  besides  Viparitakarani  Mudra.
Preserve  the  energy  by  constantly  repeating  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  doing  intense  Japa  and
meditation, and study of the Gita, the Bhagavata, the Ramayana and the like.  Develop Viveka,
Vairagya and Vichara.  As dispassion increases, so is the vital energy not allowed to leak out.
The greater the Vairagya (non-attachment to worldly objects) the more secure will be the semen.
The more the preservation of semen, the greater will be the transmutation into Ojas which means
abundant physical, mental, moral and spiritual strength and quick evolution.  Pranayam helps a
lot in gaining control over the physical machinery and the mind.  To have control over the mind
means  to  have  control  over  the  Prana  Sakti  and  prevent  Veerya  from  being  let  out.    To  have
control over this masculine power means to  have  abundant  Ojas  which  enables  the  aspirant  to
glow  spiritually.    Intense  Sadhana,  with  the  desires  reduced  to  the  barest  minimum,  will
sublimate the sexual energy into spiritual energy.  For further information, go through my book
Practice of Brahmacharya.  It gives exhaustive details regarding the subject in question.

44.  Can truth be compromised in the sense that telling a lie is sometimes not only

inevitable, but also indispensable?  Will such a breaking away from truth be justified?

Truth is truth and falsehood is falsehood.  They are as wide apart as the terminals of a
diameter of a circle or the north and the south poles.  He who wants ethical perfection, who loves
Dharma  for  the  sake  of  the  Supreme,  ought  to  stick  to  truth  however  crucial  be  the
circumstances, however tense be the situation.  Think of Harischandra ... how he stuck to truth
even in the face of trials.  How his name is to stand, for all time to come, for truth undimmed!
Harischandra was truth personified.  That is why he is known as Satya Harischandra.  This single
instance  is  enough  to  sustain  man’s  living  on  a  sound  basis  of  truth,  however  disastrous  and
threatening  be  the  crises  one  has  to  face.    However  inevitable  and  indispensable  it  be,  and
however much the situation demands to gain some selfish ends, falsehood should ruthlessly be
avoided.  Truth and falsehood cannot  be  linked  together.    Yoking  of  the  one  with  the  other  is
awfully absurd.  No doubt, in the Bhagavata and other Puranas a few exceptional instances have
been cited, where speaking untruth would be considered appropriate.  But they are a matter of
exception, they are not applicable to all times and all persons.  For illuminating and interesting
information in this connection, go through my book, “Ethical Teachings”.

16

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

45.    Due  to  Prarabdha  if  a  person  is  to  suffer  from  a  disease  or  if  he  has  to  die

young, will the repetition of the Maha Mrityunjaya Mantra help him to overcome them?

Prarabdha can be overcome by the grace of the Lord.  The Lord’s grace descends when
there  is  sincere  devotion  and  when  man  does  Purushartha.    Purushartha  is  possible  when  the
mind is pure.  The mind becomes pure when one does acts of kindness and charity.  The laws of
nature do not operate when there is the grace of the Lord.  His grace is all-powerful.  We have the
instance  of  Markandeya  who  conquered  death  by  his  Purushartha,  by  sincere  devotion  to  the
Lord.  He was destined to die young, but when the Lord’s grace descended, Lord Yama had no
power to carry out his wish.  So it is possible to overcome Prarabdha by Teevra Purushartha.

46.  Some philosophers lay great emphasis on reason and rational living.  What have

you to say?

How can reason and logic be given the highest place’?  The mind, intellect and reason fail
when you are under the power of an intoxicant. When anesthesia is given, where is the logical
mind?  Does the logical mind function when you have fasted fully for a fortnight?  It disappears
in sleep and swoon.  There are some herbs that incapacitate the mind the moment you take them.
Thus, there are many occasions when the logical mind of man becomes impotent and stops its
function.  How can this logical mind or rational living be given the highest status?  Intuition is
the highest faculty and the evolution of man is complete when he develops this intuition to the
greatest  degree  and  realizes  his  Atman.    The  knowledge  gained  in  Samadhi  is  the  highest
knowledge.  It is Samyag-drishti or Tattva-jnana.

47.    Of  all  systems  of  medicine,  which  system  is  the  most  effective  and  harmless?

Please give reasons.

Every system  of  medicine  has  got  its  own  advantages  and  disadvantages.    Each  has  its
own supremacy over the others.  Each has its own deficiencies.  As regards my view, Ayurveda
holds the foremost place in my heart.  It has been expounded by Lord Dhanvantari who is the
Ayurveda Pita.  Ayurveda is the foremost amongst the medical sciences now extant.  The effect
of  its  treatment  is  lasting  and  unhampered.    It  is  the  origin  and  source  of  most  of  the  other
systems of medicine.  As regards immediate cure with the least delay, Allopathy occupies first
place in the front rank.  Homeopathy is the most harmless system of medicine and the cheapest in
view of cost.

48.  I have been trying to do some Sadhana(cid:190)

, but my mind
is not concentrated and it gets distracted.  I try to control it, but I am not succeeding to a
degree of satisfaction.  The progress I make is not as good as it ought to be.

Japa, meditation, etc.(cid:190)

You ought to have put forth more efforts if you wanted quick progress!  Do more of Japa,
concentration and meditation.  Increase your Vairagya and Abhyasa.  At night have Satsang and
Kirtan.  Do not feel depressed; in due course of time you will make substantial progress.  Go on
doing little by little.

17

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

49.  There is such an expression as “the flight of the alone to the Alone”.  Where is

the necessity for a Guru or his grace?  God’s grace will do, as it is said in the Upanishad.

How will you get God’s grace?  When you discipline yourself.  How will you know how
to  discipline?    By  observing  others  that  had  walked  the  path  successfully  to  the  goal  of
perfection.  Who are these men who had walked to the goal?  It is these that are known as Gurus.
So you need their help, their personal example, their encouragement and their grace.  Thus, we
have  come  round  to  the  answer  that  a  Guru  is  necessary  as  well  as  his  grace.    Everything  is
necessary(cid:190) Atma Kripa, Guru Kripa and Isvara Kripa.

50.  Which is greater(cid:190)

love or wisdom?  Bhakti or Jnana?

Keep  your  intellect  in  a  box.    Love  and  wisdom  are  one.    Bhakti  and  Jnana  are  one.
Prema leads to Jnana.  The one helps the other.  People read books and start arguments.  Is this
great?  Or is that great?  It is all foolishness.  God is both love and wisdom.  One should not
waste his time in these useless arguments.

51.  Swamiji!  I live in Lucknow.  It is so different from Rishikesh.  I would very
much miss the calm, peaceful atmosphere of Rishikesh when I go back to Lucknow.  The
atmosphere there is so artificial.  What Sadhana can I do?

Why!  You can do wonderful Sadhana there also.  The world is not a  hindrance.    You
have got a very practical and thorough knowledge of Vedanta.  The fiery spirit of Ram Tirth is in
you.    Start  Brahmamuhurta  meditation  classes.    This  is  the  greatest  service  you  can  do  to  the
citizens of Lucknow.  Go from Mohalla to Mohalla and preach Vedanta.  Open study circles in
each  Mohalla.    Conduct  morning  Brahmamuhurta  meditation  classes  in  each  Mohalla  by  turn.
You would be doing a great service to all humanity and to yourself.  Awaken people to the real
purpose of their life.  This would keep your consciousness awake too.

52.    Is  it  possible  for  a  soul  with  a  male  body  to  take  a  female  body  in  the  next

incarnation?

O, yes.  The soul must undergo various experiences in different bodies.  In the male body,
the  soul  experiences  the  qualities  of  boldness,  strength,  etc.,  and  patience,  mercy,  kindness,
forgiveness, etc. in the female body.  Moreover, neither a man is a full man nor a woman a full
woman.  There is woman in man and man in woman also.  There are animal traits also in man.
There is the dog in some men, there is the donkey in some, there is the jackal in some and the
tiger  in  others.    Whichever  quality  is  predominant,  the  soul  takes  a  body  with  that  particular
quality in the next incarnation.  Therefore, develop divine qualities.  You will evolve quickly and
become divinity itself in the end.

53.  What is your conclusive opinion about rebirth?  Do you really believe that there

is rebirth?

18

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

What!    Having  been  born  a  Hindu,  and  having  the  blood  of  the  great  sages  coursing

through your veins, do you entertain this doubt in your mind?  Yes, undoubtedly there is rebirth.

First  of  all,  you  have  several  miraculous  instances  of  young  boys  and  girls  suddenly
exhibiting  great  knowledge.    A  young  girl,  who  has  never  studied  any  book,  recites  the  Gita.
How do you account for it except by the fact that she had mastered the Gita in her previous birth,
and that by the grace of the Lord, that knowledge has come to the conscious part of her mind in
this birth too?

Further, rebirth is a necessity for the soul’s evolution.  Perfection cannot be achieved in
one  birth.    Even  to  develop  some  cardinal  virtues  it  might  take  several  births.    If  you  wish  to
attain  Self-realization,  you  have  to  achieve  perfection  in  all  the  virtues.    You  have  to  achieve
perfect self-purification.  So, rebirth is a necessity for the Jiva’s evolution.

Have you seen the caterpillar moving from one leaf to another?  It will reach the edge of
one leaf; then project itself; it will catch hold of another leaf, and then only will it entirely leave
the first leaf.  The Jiva, too, goes about like this.  Even before it leaves one body, it has made
another (gross or subtle) body according to its Karmas and desires; and it enters this new body
with all the Samskaras and Vasanas.

54.  What is the interval between  death  and  the  next  birth?    Where  does  the  soul

dwell during the period between death and rebirth?

The interval between death and rebirth varies from person to person.  It may be two years
or it may be two hundred years, or more.  There is no hard and fast rule.  If the attachment to the
world is very intense, a Jiva may be born again immediately after death.  There is a girt in Dehra
Dun who has memory of her past life.  She took her present birth four years after she died in her
previous life.  Those who have done a lot of virtuous actions remain in heaven for a long time,
for two hundred or three hundred years, before the are reborn on earth.

A  wicked  man  will  go  to  another  region.    You  may  call  it  hell.    Or  it  may  be  a  place
where he may not get the objects of enjoyment that he wants.  A man addicted to drinking may
not get liquor there.  It may be a place like a jail where one has to break the stones and do such
other  hard  work.    But  if  one  has  done  virtuous  deeds,  if  one  is  a  philanthropist,  who  has  dug
public wells, built charitable hospitals, etc., he will go to heaven where he will enjoy for a long
time.

55.  If the Soul is immortal, why does Swamiji celebrate his birthday which belongs

to the body?

I do not celebrate my birthday.  It is the devotees who do it.  Celebration of such birthdays
is equal to worship of Para Brahman.  Worship of the Guru is worship of Para Brahman.  The
devotees  take  delight  in  celebrating  the  birthday,  and  they  are  benefited,  uplifted.    A  spiritual
wave is created year after year when the birthday is celebrated, and more and more people get a
chance of knowing the existence of the Divine Life Society and my teachings.  The celebrations

19

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

of the birthday is an annual reminder to the aspirants of the purpose of their life.  It is a fillip to
their Sadhana.  The pious, receptive attitude prevalent on such an occasion draws forth the grace
of the Guru and God upon the devotees.  The thoughts of peace, love, devotion, etc., sent out by
the  innumerable  devotees  that  assemble  together  to  celebrate  the  birthday  go  a  long  way  to
promote peace, harmony and spiritual well-being in the land.

It  is  not  without  purpose  that  the  Hindus  celebrate  the  birthdays  of  religious  leaders,
saints  and  sages,  such  as  Buddha  Jayanti,  Sankara  Jayanti,  Mahavira  Jayanti,  etc.    The  Hindu
calendar is spotted with many such Jayantis and other holy days, so that the observance of these
Jayantis and holy days may give the needed spiritual impetus to people and they may strive with
increased zeal for the attainment of the purpose of life, viz., God-realization.  The more we have
of  such  special,  holy  days,  the  more  we  have  the  chance  of  being  inspired  to  intensify  our
spiritual progress.

56.    When  I  sit  for  prayers,  the  lower  mind  wanders  astray,  but  the  other  mind
recites the Stotras without the slightest flaw, because of habit.  But when I consciously try
to recite the prayers, I sometimes miss the link, and have at times to repeat a Stotra from
the beginning. Thus, are there two minds?  How to overcome this difficulty?

No.  There  are  no  two  minds.    But  the  mind  gets  concentration  little  by  little,  and  the
portion  of  the  mind  which  is  spiritually  inclined(cid:190)
engages  itself  in
Sadhana, whereas that part of the mind which is more aware of its worldly Samskaras runs along
its set grooves.  Force of habit makes the repetition of prayers mechanical.  But the higher mind
should be made to concentrate on the meaning.  Then the attention of the mind will be held and
the  lower  part  of  the  mind  will  have  less  opportunity  to  detract  from  the  object  in  view.    The
whole trouble  with  careless  Sadhana  is  that  it  tends  to  become  mechanical  without  making  an
impression on the life of the aspirant.

call  it  the  higher  mind(cid:190)

57.    Are  there  fulfilled  prophecies  in  the  Hindu  scriptures?    If  so,  please  explain

them.

The Lord has given His ever-standing promise that He would appear on earth whenever
there  is  a  danger  to  Dharma,  whenever  Adharma  tries  to  vanquish  Dharma.    To  fulfil  that
promise He has appeared many times in the form of saints and sages who have protected Dharma
from decay and from the onslaughts of foreign oppression.  They have instilled new elements of
vigour and perspective in Hinduism.  Therefore, Hinduism continues to flourish.  Whenever there
is a necessity, saints and sages will emerge, not from the heavens, but from among the people
themselves.

Hinduism  does  not  believe  exclusively  in  one  prophet.    The  prophecies  given  in  the

Puranas about the state of affairs to come have also proved true.

58.  If I love Jesus, must I love him alone, and not the lesser divinities like Mary and

the Ikons?

20

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

No. There should be no exclusiveness to the love of Jesus, even though other Christian
saints may not be equal to him.  They also could be worshipped, if you have devotion for them,
as expressions of the same Divinity which manifested itself in a most intense and complete way
through  Jesus.    All  messengers  of  God  deserve  our  respect  and  adoration.    Someone  may  be
temperamentally  and  emotionally  closer  to  an  individual,  but  it  does  not  mean  that  the  latter
should shut the others out.  No single prophet or saint holds exclusively the mandate of God or
the key to the heavens.

59.    I  am  convinced  that  praying  to  saints  and  worshipping  them  is  absolutely
wrong.  They prayed to God and found salvation for themselves, and in like manner, we
also can take care of our salvation without depending on any saint.

No. It is not so.  Saints and sages are worthy of our adoration and prayers, because they
have shown us the ways to God-realization.  The apprentice, who has just entered service in any
field, is expected to have an attitude of submission and receptivity to his senior who trains him
on the job, although the latter may be a man like himself.  The same is applicable in the field of
spirituality.    By  respecting  saints  and  following  their  teachings,  you  grow  in  spirituality,  you
learn to love, and know God more adequately.

60.  Someone tries to tell me that Nirvikalpa Samadhi is, to quote, “only a strange
nerve-condition accompanied by paralysis of the critical faculties”.  What should I reply, if
anything?

It  is  useless  to  convince  a  person  about  the  validity  of  Nirvikalpa  Samadhi  when  he
cannot  understand  it.    Logical  arguments  may  be  advanced,  but  a  rank  skeptic  has  to  evolve
further  to  be  alive  to  this  truth.    The  philosophical  implications  and  mystic  signification  of
experience must be studied well before one can attempt to answer such skeptics.

61.    After  one  of  the  most  complicated  series  of  dialectics  in  “The  Life  Divine”,
Aurobindo  finally  concludes  with  a  straight  face:  “And  all  these  explanations  explain
nothing”.  Is there any point, then, any real benefit, in following through the thin thread of
this tapestry?

In the ultimate sense, words do not explain Truth.  But they give a hint by which one can
know Truth directly in experience.  Words have a relative value and they must be made use of,
though they do not constitute our real aim.  Relative obstructions to the knowledge of Truth can
be removed through relative means and thus the absolute Truth can be realized.

62.  I am under the impression that no advanced Yogi has ever achieved anything in
the realm of matter or contributed to progress outside of writing about high, abstract and
introspectionist themes and inspiring a small handful to do likewise.

How then do you regard the production of a seemingly supremely great book like
Aurobindo’s “The Life Divine”, which almost nobody reads, almost nobody understands,
or  books  like  “Treatise  on  Cosmic  Fire”,  or  your  books,  all  of  which  seem  so  totally
unrelated to helping anybody individually or collectively, in a material sense?

21

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

It  is  not  correct  to  think  that  Yogins  merely  write,  but  never  do  anything  for  human
progress.  The help that they give, the common man cannot understand, and man has no right to
expect a specific form of help from the Yogins, for the Yogins do what is really good and not
what is materially convenient to man.

Books which deal with metaphysical subjects and which faithfully explain the goal of life
and the method of attaining it are a great help to struggling humanity.  Yogins write such books
for  the  good  of  others,  in  the  spiritual  sense  and  even  in  a  pragmatic  sense.    But  they  do
something more, too; they give direct, invisible help.

63.  How is Kevala Kumbhak done?  The practice is not quite clear.  It is said to be a
Kumbhak  without  Purak  and  Rechak.    This  is  not  intelligible,  for  necessarily  before  the
Kumbhak there has to be either inhalation or exhalation.

Your  query  on  the  practice  of  Kevala  Kumbhak  is  not  surprising,  for  it  seems  to  be
impossible to do Kumbhak without doing either Purak or Rechak.  However, what is meant is
that  for  Kevala  Kumbhak  the  retention  is  suddenly  performed  at  any  given  moment  when  the
mind is just about to get concentrated.

This sudden cessation of Prana at that particular, crucial, psychological moment becomes
of  immense  help  to  the  Yogi  in  arresting  the  mind,  which  is  already  assuming  the  mood  to
Dharana.  Hence, Kevala Kumbhak is an invaluable aid to Dhyana.  You will, therefore, see that
this  act  of  Kumbhak  is  not  preceded  by  any  deliberate  process  of  either  inhalation  (Purak)  or
exhalation (Rechak).  It may, therefore, be best described as the abrupt stoppage of the breath.
The Yogi does not deliberately perform either Purak or Rechak before he does Kevala Kumbhak.
He gets into Kevala Kumbhak in whatever state the breathing may be at that moment.  It may be
in the middle of an inhalation or in the middle of an exhalation.  The breath may be partially in or
partially out.  Or again, the breath may be totally fully inhaled or totally exhaled.  Whatever be
the  condition,  the  moment  concentration  supervenes,  the  meditator  immediately  arrests  his
breathing in Kevala Kumbhak.  I am sure the matter is perfectly clear now.

64.  In my work of spreading the knowledge of Yoga, do you have any special advice

to give me?

Side by side with instructions on practical Yogic processes, place always stress upon the
great  importance  of  Sadachara,  Yama  and  Niyama.    Inspire  the  students  with  noble  idealism.
Spur them on to strive for a life of lofty virtue, active goodness and selflessness.  You must stress
the need for self-purification and self-mastery.  The true inner Yoga is the transformation of the
essential nature of man.  The lower human nature  should  gradually  give  place  to  an  illumined
divine  nature  through  a  process  of  spiritualization  of  the  entire  being  of  man.    This  should  be
brought home in an effective manner, yet withal with great sympathy, understanding and insight.
The aim is to attain divine consciousness.

22

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

65.    Can  prayers  cure  diseases  when  doctors  fail?    Is  it  true  that  more  things  are

wrought by prayers than the world could dream of?

Doctors and medicines are only instruments in the hands of God.  Unless God wills, none
can cure, or get cured.  Man should do his best, with initiative, enterprise and perseverance, but
depend on God’s grace for everything.  To bear with suffering and accept it as a blessing of God
in disguise is great wisdom.  Prayer invokes the inner potentialities of the individual, which flow
only from God, and they can certainly work miracles.

66.  You state that aspirants in the Nivritti Marga should have a little money in the
bank or must depend on alms.  Now I have no money and I do not like to beg from door to
door, but I am very anxious to take Sannyasa.  Will you kindly suggest a method to quench
my thirst?

There  are  beautiful  Ashrams  throughout  India  where  Nishkamya  Seva  is  carried  out.
They are always in  need  of  sincere  and  energetic  workers.    You  can  remain  in  any  one  of  the
Ashrams and help in the Ashram’s activities.  They will take care of your material wants.  Do not
be changing from one Ashram to another.  Select the best that suits you and stick to it.

67.  I have read that a person, after receiving initiation from one Guru, can, if he
finds a better person, become the latter’s disciple; and that though he has ceased to be the
former’s disciple, he should have respect for him also.  What is your view?

The vast majority of people do not enjoy the good fortune of coming into contact with a
God-realized saint.  What happens in their case is this.  Traditionally, each family has a Guru-
Parampara.  Each sect has its own sectional Guru.  The aspirant born in a particular sect has, by
that mere fact, to accept the Guru of the sect as his own Guru.  This Guru is by no means fit to be
called so, according to the standards set by our Sastras.  He is not a spiritual personality, but a
religious  person.    He  does  not  possess  Adhyatmic  realization,  but  is  appointed  as  a  religious
leader in order not to keep this traditional post vacant.  The aspirant takes him as his Guru and
receives initiation from him.  He practices Sadhana according to his Guru’s teachings and up to a
certain point he can certainly progress.  Up to this point only that Guru himself has gone!  To go
beyond that stage, that Guru cannot guide the aspirant, because he is not a God-realized sage.  At
that stage, if the Sadhak happens to meet a Guru of higher achievements, he can certainly become
his disciple.  In fact, if his first Guru is sincere, he himself will direct the disciple to the feet of
another Guru of higher achievements.

If  this  question  of  changing  the  Guru  arises  in  an  aspirant  who  has  already  received
initiation from a Guru who has reached the highest stage, the defect is in the aspirant, not in the
Guru.  And, even if the aspirant goes to another Guru, this “want” cannot be fulfilled.  He must
correct the defect in himself and stick to his Guru; he must banish the desire to change his Guru.

Scriptures tell us that if we have once accepted a Brahma-Nishtha as our Guru, we should
not  change  our  allegiance  to  another  Guru.    The  spiritual  connection  or  link  is  eternal.    If  an

23

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

aspirant tries to break it and runs after all kinds of Siddhas and Jnanis, he cannot progress even
an inch on the path.  The ideal is beautifully stated in the Upanishadic Mantra:

“Yasya Deve Para Bhaktihi Yatha Deve Thatha Gurow
Tasyaite Kathithahyartha Prakasante Mahatmanah”

It means: He who has supreme devotion to God, and as much devotion to his Guru as he
has to God, to him the truths of the Upanishads shall be revealed.  If devotion to God cannot be
changed, devotion to the Guru also cannot be changed.

Do  not  forget  the  glorious  example  of  Ekalavya.    He  did  not  have  even  a  sight  of  the
Guru;  yet,  his  devotion  was  so  great  that  he  took  a  mere  image  to  be  his  living  Guru  and  his
Bhavana was so intense that this mud-Guru taught him the great secrets of archery.  Here it is
Bhavana that really counts.

Upa-Gurus,  however,  can  be  countless;  this  is  what  the  life  of  the  Avadhuta  that  is
narrated in the Bhagavata teaches us.  We should respect all saints.  The spiritual Guru sows the
spiritual seed in us.  It is our business to water it, to make it grow in us, so that it might in time
yield the delicious fruit of Self-realization.

68.  I desire to reduce my sleeping hours and have control over sleep.  Can I take

recourse to any medicine?

You should not reduce your sleep by the use of medicine.  That will affect your system.
Sufficient  rest  must  be  given  to  the  body  through  sleep.    When  you  regularly  enter  into  deep
meditation,  the  system  derives  considerable  rest  and  automatically  sleep  can  then  be  reduced.
That will not affect your health.

Sleep should be reduced gradually and cautiously.  Now, for a month go to bed at 9-30
p.m. and get up at 4 a.m. After a month, go to bed at 10 p.m. and get up at 3-30 a.m. Again, after
a month go to bed at 10-30 p.m. and get up at 3 a.m. Thus, by gradual means you can reduce your
sleep.  Sleeping in day-time must be avoided.

69.  If God is almighty and all-powerful, why can’t He see that everybody does his

actions properly?

Everybody does his actions properly.  A thief must pilfer things.  A scoundrel must do
wrong actions.  These are Kartavya.  Remember this world is Trigunatmic and relative.  Every
movement of the foot, every step, is an attempt towards Sat-chit-ananda.  The world is a relative
plane.  Prostitutes, saints, rogues, beggars, kings are all doing their respective duties.  Good and
evil are relative terms.  Evil exists to glorify good.  Hatred exists to glorify love.  A rogue is not
an eternal rogue.  He  can  become  a  saint  within  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  when  he  is  placed  in
proper Sattvic company.

24

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

70.  If God is just and merciful, why should there be so much misery in this world?

Sometimes we see virtuous men suffer and hypocrites enjoy.  What is the logic in this?

Misery  is  the  eye-opener  in  this  world.    Had  it  not  been  for  the  presence  of  pain  and

misery, no one would attempt for salvation.  Misery is a blessing in disguise.

Virtuous  men  treat  suffering  as  a  blessing  as  it  develops  the  power  of  endurance  and
mercy,  and  makes  them  remember  God  always.    They  welcome  suffering.    They  do  not  want
worldly  pleasure  and  prosperity.    They  have  a  changed  vision.    They  always  keep  a  balanced
mind in pleasure and pain.  You cannot understand their mental state.  They rejoice in suffering.
Your mind is still worldly.  You cannot understand these things.

71.  Equal vision is outlined for Moksha.  In this connection, I shall be obliged if you
could let me know whether “Don’t touchism” has got any significance.  I have got too rigid
orthodox principles.  If I see an untouchable or a sweeper, even from a yard or so, I take a
bath  and  wash  my  clothes.    I  shall  be  glad  to  know  whether  these  Niyamas  should  be
observed.

Pray to God to give you that day on which you will embrace a scavenger with joy, feeling
oneness.  That day will be a blessed day.  You have a very small, narrow, constricted heart.  Try
to expand.  Slowly give up the “Don’t touchism”.  It will greatly bar your spiritual progress.  It
will take a long time in your case.  You have got a deep-rooted idea of “Don’t touchism”.  In this
very second, ruthlessly break all barriers that divide or separate man from man.  You will enjoy
indescribable joy and supreme peace.

72.  When Kundalini is awakened, how to take it to Sahasrara through the various
Chakras and how to keep it at a particular Chakra where the Yogi wants it?  And how to
bring the Kundalini back to Muladhara through the various Chakras?  Kindly let me know
the movements of the Kundalini.

You will have to take the Kundalini to the Sahasrara Chakra through the practice of Yoni
Mudra.  If you become absolutely desireless, if the Vasanas are destroyed in toto, Kundalini will
ascend by itself without any effort, through the force of purity.

Kundalini will drop down by itself through the force of Prarabdha.  It will stop at each
Chakra by itself.  You need not exert to fix it anywhere.  It is better you stay under the proper
guidance  of  a  Yogi  Guru  to  learn  all  these  Yogic  mysteries  and  secrets.    Try  to  get  ethical
perfection before you attempt to awaken the Kundalini and take it to Sahasrara.  When you are in
the path and when you are sincerely doing Sadhana or Yogic practices, you yourself will know
how to take the Kundalini from one Chakra to another.  Refer to my book  Kundalini Yoga for
detailed instructions.

73.    Is  this  universe  an  accidental  combination  of  jarring  atoms?    Please  be  kind

enough to explain the evolution of the universe.

25

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

The universe is not an accidental combination of atoms.  The theory of evolution differs
according to the different schools of philosophy.  The most accepted view, however, is that of the
Vedanta.    According  to  it,  the  universe  is  a  systematic  organic  whole  directed  by  a  supremely
intelligent and omnipotent Being behind it.  From the relative standpoint, the universe appears as
a  gradual  unfoldment  of  the  primordial  matter  into  the  visible  gross  effects,  this  matter  being
actuated by the all-pervading Consciousness Itself.  The effects of this matter are, objectively, the
five  principles  of  sound,  touch,  form,  taste  and  smell,  giving  rise  to  ether,  air,  fire,  water  and
earth,  and  subjectively,  the  subconscious,  the  mind,  the  intellect,  the  ego,  the  sense-organs  of
perception  and  action,  the  vital  energies  and  the  physical  body.    All  these  effects  appear  as
realities, though they are not so actually, because they are based on the one Reality which is the
omnipresent Pure Consciousness.  From the absolute standpoint, there is no substantial universe
at  all,  except  the  temporary  external  form  taken  by  the  fluctuating  imagination  of  the  mental
consciousness within.

74.  If an individual is a Perfect Master, he is capable of functioning on all planes at
the  same  time.    He  possesses  to  a  remarkable  degree  the  powers  of  clairvoyance  and
clairaudience.  Can he not read the thoughts of the student before the student has time to
utter  them,  before  the  student  can  bring  out  his  questions,  as  Sri  Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa did?  Can one who has such powers, even of thought-reading, be regarded
as a Master?

Clairvoyance and clairaudience are not always automatic  processes.    Unless  the  Master
directs his attention towards someone, he need not necessarily be aware of the seeker’s mentality
and doubts.  Imagine a seer or a Perfect Master who is ever aware of what everybody thinks!  A
Siddha does see and hear everything in Samadhi.  This everything comes then to mean the Self or
Atman  or  Supreme  Consciousness  where  the  individual  thoughts  and  words  cease  to  exist  as
such.

Powers like thought-reading do not necessarily connote perfection; and perfection cannot
be vetoed by the absence of these powers.  A Perfect Master can acquire these powers if he so
wills; but you cannot force him to.

75.  What would be your advice to a person who has taken initiation for the second
time  due  to  the  force  of  certain  circumstances,  yet  has  no  faith  in  the  initiator?    A
compound feeling of attraction and repulsion is the outcome of it.  Vacillation between the
good principles inculcated from babyhood and the faith as expounded by some now gives
rise  to  a  perpetual  internal  contest.    And  if  the  voice  of  conscience  strongly  shows
disfavour, what would you advise?

Do  not  mistake  your  emotions  or  the  promptings  of  your  own  mind  for  the  voice  of
conscience.  Only if you have learnt the art of stilling your thoughts for considerable periods of
time can you claim to be able to hear the voice of conscience.  When you begin to hear it, you
will  automatically  begin  following  its  dictates  and  all  conflicts  will  end.    Vacillation  has  no
antidote  except  determination,  which  is  so  difficult  when  vacillation  is  present!    You  must

26

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

exercise  your  will  and  cut  out  one  of  the  conflicting  thoughts(cid:190)
yourself or the opinion of one whom you are inclined to trust, is the worse.

the  one  which,  according  to

76.  In Kalisantaranopanishad, it is said that repetition of the Maha Mantra is the
only means for destroying sins in this Kali Yuga.  But this Mantra has two names,  Hare
Rama  and  Hare  Krishna.    As  these  two  names  are  different,  will  it  not  be  Vyabicharini
Bhakti  if  the  names  of  two  gods  are  uttered  by  a  devotee?    And  what  is  the  form  to  be
thought of in meditation while repeating the above Mantra?

It cannot tantamount  to  Vyabicharini  Bhakti.    Real  Vyabicharini  Bhakti  is  worshipping
God for a few minutes and again loving children, wife, property, etc., for the rest of the day.  The
Supreme  Deity  behind  the  two  names  Rama  and  Krishna  is  one.    He  is  Lord  Vishnu.    For
meditation,  you  can  have  either  the  form  of  Lord  Krishna  or  Lord  Rama  according  to  the
tendency, predilection or taste of your mind.

77.  How do you train your disciples for quick spiritual success?

As  a  drastic  measure  to  overhaul  the  vicious  worldly  Samskaras,  I  ask  the  students  to
drown  themselves  in  active  service  for  some  months  or  years.    The  period  of  training  varies
according to the evolution of the students.  They must know cooking, washing, and nursing of the
sick.  They must serve the Sadhus and the Sannyasins in every possible way.  Side by side they
must be able to learn all the Yogic exercises, concentration, Japa, meditation, etc.  They must be
able to write essays on philosophy and Yoga.  They must do Kirtan and deliver lectures also.  I
teach them on all these points.  I give them lessons in the treatment of some ordinary diseases.
When I find that the students are able to control their senses and advance in concentration and
meditation and when I find that they have developed all the Sattvic qualities, I send them to cool
places with instructions for deep meditation.

78.    I  would  like  to  know  why  we  are  all  created  and  put  to  this  miserable  and
pitiable plight.  You would argue that we are never created and never would die. Then why
should  not  we  all  be  in  that  all-pure,  omnipotent  state  without  being  entangled  by
Samskaras and Maya?

transcendental queries(cid:190)

Questions like these are Ati-prasnas(cid:190)

for which you will not get
an answer even if you rack your brain for millions of years.  Intelligent people leave questions
such as the ‘why?’ and the ‘how?’ of the universe.  If a small son questions his father, “Papa,
how did you procreate me?”, what answer will Papa give?  He will simply say, “Wait.  When you
become a man, you will understand this point”.  This is exactly the case with you and  several
other new aspirants in whom the Light is trying to shine forth.  Do not put the cart before the
horse.  Realize the Atma.  Then you will understand these matters.  At the present moment, apply
yourself to solid Sadhana in earnestness and remove Mala, Vikshepa and Avarana.  Do not enter
into vain discussions and arguments on such matters.  You can ask me questions on other points
of philosophy.  Wherever you go, you will get the same answer.  Have you grasped my point?

79.  How can the character of a nation shine forth in its pristine glory?

27

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

As  far  as  the  Indian  nation  is  concerned,  it  is  essentially  spiritual.    In  olden  days,
everywhere  there  used  to  be  Ashrams  pulsating  with  divine  ideals  and  replete  with  venerable
Acharyas who were intensely practical and realized.  Even their Sishyas were highly evolved and
receptive in their very nature in regard to their Guru’s teachings.  The degradation in the present
era is mainly due to the aping of Western manners and the copying of the Western modes of life
without doing even a modicum of justice to how far they are conducive to one’s moral, physical,
mental  and  spiritual  growth  and  how  far  they  are  helpful  in  achieving  the  ultimate  perfection
known as Moksha which is the be-all and end-all of life.  The modern individual is apt to ignore
to imbibe what is best in others, but he is quite willing to accept that which debases him in moral
evolution.  Such being the case, Ashrams should grow in plenty in every nook and corner of the
world, particularly in India.  Spirituality is the birthright of India, though it is not barred from any
other country.  Hence, India should take a lead in this direction and illuminate the dark corners of
the world where materialism is predominant.

Secondly,  religious  education  should  be  made  compulsory  on  a  common  basis  without
any partiality towards any particular faith.  Religious intolerance is partly the cause of so many
wars, feuds, dissensions, etc.  Education should be imparted free to one and all and it should even
be  enforced  on  all  age,  boy  or  girl,  adult  man  or  woman.    Sastra  and  Dharma,  science  and
religion, should go hand in hand  like  twin  sisters  without  any  detriment  to  progress  in  current
worldly affairs.

People  should  be  made  to  understand  that  Karma  of  any  nature,  provided  that  it  is  not
against Dharma, does not stand in the way of realizing the goal of Moksha and they should be
freely allowed to follow their own respective choices so as, to shine well in their inclined fields.
The age-old traditions, provided they are not a hindrance to graded evolution, should be kept up
by all means so as to remind us of the ancient glory of Bharata Varsha.  In the name of scientific
advancement, old methods of industry and livelihood should not be set at naught; but they should
continue to proceed as usual, as rejuvenation of life lies in their survival alone.  The Ashrams
that  manufacture  ideal  Dheeras  in  the  field  of  spirituality  should  undertake  to  disseminate  the
knowledge  of  the  Self  or  Atma-jnana  through  periodical  tours  and  pilgrimages  by  their
Ashramites.

Periodical  spiritual  conferences  should  be  held  and  the  methods  of  Sadhana  or
Anushthana should be imparted.  Such reformatory activities should go on, not only in India but
everywhere throughout the world.  The lead is willed by the Lord to fall to the lot of India.  It is
her onerous duty to take it up immediately.

80.  How to stop smoking?

Abandon the habit.  Take a soothing medicine to counteract nervous excitement.  Avoid
the  company  of  smokers.    Divert  the  mind  to  some  busy  activity.    Do  not  give  the  mind  idle
leisure.  Study hygienic principles, the laws of good health and ideal life.  Impress well upon the
mind  the  ruinous  effect  of  tobacco  upon  the  human  system.    Observe  Ahimsa,  Satyam  and

28

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Brahmacharya.    Study  spiritual  texts  and  contemplate  on  their  meaning.    Practice  Asan  and
Pranayam.  Remember God always.  All evil traits will vanish.

81.  The Gita touches on many subjects which are useful to an aspirant after God-
Knowledge,  but  strangely  enough,  omits  to  mention  anything  about  the  purpose  behind
creation.  Why did God embark on creation at all?

The Lord’s silence, in the Gita, about the purpose of creation, is truly a demonstration of
His divine wisdom.  This very same problem arises in various minds in various forms.  How did
Avidya arise in Brahman?  When did Karma begin?  Why did the Formless assume forms?  How
could  darkness  or  Maya  exist  in  the  Supreme  Absolute  Light?    And  so  on.    There  can  be  no
answer  to  these  questions.    It  involves  the  understanding  of  the  Ultimate  Principle,  the
Intelligence that is behind and beyond these questions, the Cause of all causes, the Subject of all
objects.  It cannot be known as an object.  And, when the subject (Self or Atman) knows Itself,
speech  and  thought  cease.    The  questioner  and  question  vanish  in  the  quest.    The  doubt
disappears in the doubter.  In that Supreme Silence, the problem is inexpressibly solved!    The
riddle is solved; but speech is baffled and the question remains unanswerable.

Therefore, the Lord is silent about the transcendental question in the Gita; but, such is the

divine wisdom of the Almighty that He gives ways and means of solving the problem.

Don’t  bother  about  why  creation  came  into  being,  but  try  to  know  the  Creator!    Take
creation  for  what  it  is  and  try  to  transcend  it.    This  is  wisdom.    Trying  to  probe  intellectually
into the mystery is only buying psychological distress.

There  is  no  ‘Why?’  in  respect  of  transcendental  matters.  ‘Why?’  is  only  for  worldly
things.  Reason is finite and frail.  God only knows the ‘Why?’.  Realize the Self.  Then you will
get the answer.  Then you will know the origin and nature of Maya and everything.

82.  What do you think of the assassination of Gandhi?

It is the Divine Will that works everywhere.  Separation from the body does not mean the
death of the person.  What one wishes to do, he shall do even after the death of the body.  The
body  is  not  the  real  doer  of  anything.    What  really  does  actions  is  never  destroyed.    It  is  not
possible  to  prevent  anyone  from  doing  anything  by  merely  killing  his  body.    Gandhiji  was  a
votary  of  the  Second  Chapter  of  the  Gita  and  he  knew  very  well  that  the  Self  in  him  was
indestructible.

83.  You say, “Atman is our real Self and we are, in reality, universal and absolute”.
You also say, “The personal relative self involves the idea of individuality, but the Absolute
does not ... The question arises(cid:190)
are there two selves?  One involving individuality, and the
other, without individuality but universal?

There is really one Self which is the Absolute.  The relative self is not something different
from the Absolute Self, but it is only the Absolute Self experienced through the adjunct or the

29

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

instrument  of  the  mind.    An  object  has  an  independent  nature  of  its  own,  but  when  it  is  seen
through a distorted coloured glass, it also appears distorted and coloured.  It does not however
mean from this that the object is both perfect and distorted at the  same  time;  the  difference  is
only in the means of perception and knowledge.  This is the case also with the experience of the
Absolute  Self  with  the  help  of  the  finite  mind  acting  as  the  instrument  of  knowledge.    The
difference is in the medium of perception; the Reality is one.

84.  My experience has made me conclude that goodness does not always pay in our
dealings with people.  Then what is the use of being good and doing good when goodness is
not recognized and properly rewarded?  Please illumine.

Whether  goodness  pays  you  well  or  not  from  the  material  standpoint,  do  good  and  be
good  always.    No  doubt  the  worldly-minded  generally  take  advantage  of  such  people  as  ideal
gullibles to carry their wishes through and even to deceive.  It matters nothing, for the Lord is
always on the side of the good and the righteous who stick to Dharma and who rely on Him.  No
man is to be considered good without the virtue of piety or God-fearing nature.  Goodness and
piety go together.

The good man is always the spiritually-inclined, though he is in the world.  He is unlike
the  Vyavaharic  Purusha.    To  be  good  is  to  increase  the  purity  and  devotion  unto  the  Lord  in
abundant measure.  To do good is to reap good in return.  If a good action is done, a sweet fruit in
favour of you arises with the result that you enjoy it whether you want it or not.  If a bad action is
done, the consequent fruit of action liable to be enjoyed willingly or unwillingly will be bitter and
against you.  Whether goodness is recognized or not, do good and be good throughout life.  This
alone pays you well to attain Chitta Suddhi and knowledge of the Self.  Only those who have no
knowledge  of  the  Self,  i.e.,  the  worldly-inclined,  do  not  recognize  good  as  a  medium  of
perfection through gradual evolution.  Not so is the case with the spiritual-minded, for they know
fully well that to do good and to be good help them gain the goal of life, viz., God-realization.

Remember  that  the  Lord  does  recognize  and  reward  always  the  good  people  and  good
actions.  He actually lives and moves in them.  The good man actually feels the Lord’s presence
in himself and around without a vestige of doubt.  It is a mockery for a man to consider himself
good without being able to be conscious of God’s presence in him, with him and around him.  Do
not  question  the  benefit  of  being  good  and  doing  good  when  goodness  is  not  recognized  or
properly  rewarded,  for  to  work  alone  man  has  the  right  and  not  to  the  fruits(cid:190)
good  or
bad(cid:190)

thereof.

85.  Will there be world peace if there are no politicians?

World peace would not depend upon the existence or non-existence of politicians, if only
people,  individually  and  collectively,  understand  and  live  up  to  the  canons  of  perfect
righteousness, wisdom, truth and justice.  As long as people do not rise to this level, ‘politicians’,
which  is  only  a  name  for  those  who  are  in  charge  of  the  administration,  will  continue  to  be
actuated by their selfishness and greed and will accordingly ride roughshod over the feelings and

30

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

sufferings  of  millions  and  will  go  on  embarking  on  wars  however  destructive  they  may  be  in
general.

86.  I am doing vigorous Tapas and meditation for the last five years.  With all that,
my troubles and difficulties are multiplying.  I have lost my job.  I am starving now. What
shall I do?  Is this the Grace of the Lord?  How can I continue my Sadhana when I have
nothing to eat?

It is said that the Lord gives food even to the frog that lives between the strata of rocks.
Why has He failed in your case alone?  This is a great wonder!  Has He failed in His duty?  This
cannot  be.    He  is  all-merciful,  all  benevolent!    Is  it  because  He  wants  to  develop  in  you  the
constructive qualities(cid:190)
courage, presence of mind, endurance, strong will, fortitude, more mercy
and love(cid:190)

and make His instrument more fit for His Divine Lila?  Yes, this must be the case.

The struggling and sincere  aspirant  also  gets  more  troubles  and  difficulties,  because  he
has  to  march  quickly  on  the  path  to  reach  the  portals  of  the  Kingdom  of  Supreme  Peace  and
Unalloyed Bliss.

Princess  Mira  renounced  the  pomp  and  glory  of  the  Palace  and  walked  in  the  burning
sands of Rajputana.  She starved on her way to Brindavan.  She slept on the ground.  She lived on
alms.  The Pandavas underwent countless sufferings even when Lord Krishna was at their back.
Draupadi was placed in a very bad plight even though she had Bhima, Arjuna and Dharmaputra
to fight for her.  Our sufferings are nothing, when compared to the persecutions underwent by the
five Pandavas, Sri Rama and Mira.  Look at the sufferings of Raja Harischandra and his wife!
He had to serve in the cremation ground and do the work of a Chandala to keep up truthfulness.
It is suffering that develops the will.  It is suffering alone that moulds a man on the spiritual path.
Be not troubled.  Feel Lord Siva’s grace and mercy at every step.  All difficulties will melt away
like mist before the sun.  Have perfect unswerving faith in His grace.

87.  What are the qualifications of a real Guru or a true guide?  Is it possible for an

ordinary human being to select a real guide?  If so, how?

A real Guru is a Srotriya and a Brahmanishtha, one who is learned in the scriptures and
established in Brahman.  He who is wise, desireless and sinless can be a true teacher and guide.
The Guru, by virtue of his wisdom and capacity, draws towards himself the souls fit to be guided
by him.  When one feels that he is thus spontaneously drawn to a Mahapurusha whom he cannot
help  loving,  admiring  and  serving,  who  is  an  embodiment  of  unruffled  tranquillity,  mercy  and
spiritual  experience,  such  a  great  one  can  be  taken  as  the  Guru.    A  Guru  is  one  in  whom  the
disciple can find no defect and who serves as the ideal to be reached by the disciple.  In short, the
Guru is God in manifested form, and when Divinity is seen in a person, he can be chosen as the
Guru.  The  relation  between  the  Guru  and  the  Sishya  is  genuine  and  unbreakable,  even  as  that
between God and man is.  It is a natural law that when a certain event has to take place in the
universe,  the  conditions  necessary  for  the  same  are  brought  about  exactly  at  the  proper  time.
When the disciple is ready to receive the higher Light, he is brought into contact with a suitable
Guru by the Supreme Dispensation.

31

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

88.  How does the mind differ from the Soul?

The  mind  is  a  special,  limited  particularization  of  the  Soul-consciousness,  which  is
unlimited and never ceases to be all-pervading.  The mind is the form of the collective totality of
desires, and hence, it is inert and powerless.  But it appears to be conscious and powerful as the
Inner Self or the Soul is reflected through it.  The mind alone is the real person or the individual
and it is the real doer of all actions.  It is the experiencer of every condition in the universe, both
objectively  and  subjectively.    The  Soul  is  the  Absolute  which  is  not  really  affected  by  any
experience of the mind.  The mind is mortal, while the Soul is immortal.

89.    Our  sages  and  Tapasvins  make  use  of  tiger-skins  or  deer-skins.    Does  it  not
amount to sinful violence to kill an animal or get it killed, particularly in the case of those
who are out for spiritual advancement?  Does it not sound suicidal for a hermit to sit all his
life on the skin of a dead animal and aspire for deliverance or Mukti for himself?

The most important point to remember in connection with the use of deer-skin or tiger-
skin as Asana or seat is that the animal is never killed for obtaining its skin.  The deer was always
a part of the ancient Ashrams of Sannyasins and Maharshis; and they should have found the skin
of the deer, when it died its natural death, an easily procurable material for the Asan.  To those
living in dense jungles, therefore, deer-skin and the bark of trees should have been more easily
and abundantly available than cloth.

Tiger-skins, too were procured in a similar way, though much less numerically, and that
accounts for the wider use of the deer-skin as Asana.  In fact, Mriga-charma  is  prescribed  for
Asana; and Mriga means deer.

From the spiritual point of view, the sages found that doing Sadhana seated on a deer-skin
was  highly  conducive  to  Siddhi.    The  power  generated  in  the  body  through  Sadhana  was
preserved by the skin.

90.  Can I practice Pranayam by consulting books?

Yes.    You  must  read  the  instructions  several  times  and  understand  the  technique
thoroughly.    If  you  have  doubts,  consult  some  experienced  men  and  then  begin  the  practice.
Have  regular  and  systematic  practice.    If  you  want  quick  progress,  you  must  follow  my
instructions  given  in  the  first  two  chapters  of  my  book  “Science  of  Pranayama”.    You  can
gradually increase the period of Kumbhak to two minutes.  In the advanced stages of practice, it
will be better to have the help of a Guru.

91.  Can a married lady practice Pranayam without any harm?

Yogic practices(cid:190) whatever be their variety(cid:190)

can be resorted  to  by  males  and  females
alike. In the case of those practices that concern the body, like the Hatha or the Kundalini, the

32

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

woman should observe certain limitations owing to the natural sensitivity of her physical frame.
There is absolutely no harm if a woman takes to the practice of Pranayam.

92.  Why was Gita taught on the battlefield?

There  was  some  meaning  in  the  Lord’s  choosing  the  battlefield  for  the  Gita  teaching.
Yes.  He wanted to point out to us that wisdom should not recline on the armchair.  If his wisdom
did not accompany a man to the field of battle, it was no wisdom at all!  Any man could talk
philosophy “after dinner”; any man could discourse upon the most intricate points in the Yoga
Shastras sitting comfortably near the fireplace.  But that is no wisdom at all; it is mere lip-service
to the supreme science of Knowledge of the Self.  It is hypocrisy.  These people generally fail
when they face a trial, when their wisdom is put to the acid test of practical demonstration, when
they find themselves in a crisis.

Krishna’s Panchajanya roars a big ‘No’!  No, no.  That is not wisdom; real wisdom will
serve you right on the battlefield, right in a crisis, and will enable you to surmount the obstacle,
resist  the  temptation,  arise  victoriously  from  the  trial.    You  will  convert  the  trial  into  a  great
opportunity for revealing your genius.  For, genius is often made by crisis.

A  strong  character  will  not  succumb  to  tests  and  temptations,  however  strong  and
powerful they may be.  On the contrary, a strong character reveals its strength only at the time of
such crises.  A morally weak man talks philosophy when things are getting on the way he wishes
them to; but his philosophy takes leave of him at the sight of a test.  Whereas, a morally strong
man may give no indication whatsoever of his strength in ordinary times, but when a great trial
faces him, he reacts most surprisingly and reveals his character.

That is what Sadhaks should understand from Krishna’s choice of the dreadful platform
of  the  battlefield  for  His  discourse.    It  was,  as  it  were,  a  fitting  prelude  to  the  great  Yoga  of
Equanimity that He was about to preach through Arjuna to the entire humanity.

93.  I am practicing Sirshasan for a full half an hour.  I am not able to cure wet-

dreams.  What is the fault in my Sadhana?  How can I destroy passion?

The practice of Sirshasan for a long time will doubtless help you a lot in destroying your
passion.  Your thoughts also should be pure.  You should not entertain any lustful thought.  Have
Satsang.  Take Sattvic food.  Do not look at ladies.  Develop Vairagya.  Control the Indriyas.  All
these instructions should be followed if you want sure success.  If you happen to entertain lustful
thoughts, if you live in the company of lustful persons, and if you do not take Sattvic food, how
can you destroy your passion even if you practice Sirshasan for a full three hours?

94.    I  took  Sannyasa  recently.    Can  I  have  a  Parivrajaka  life  or  should  I  live  in

seclusion?

For  a  new  student  of  Sannyasa,  strict  seclusion  for  six  years  with  intense  Sadhana  is
essential.    It  depends  upon  the  condition  of  your  mind.    In  Parivrajaka  life,  you  cannot  have

33

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

regular and systematic Sadhana.  There is distraction everywhere.  For some years you should be
away from the sensual objects.  Strict seclusion will bring immense benefit.  Once in a year, for a
few  days,  you  can  go  to  a  place  for  change  of  climate.    If  you  find  that  you  are  entering  into
Tamas, you should combine active service.  For a beginner, Nishkama Karma for two or three
years will prove good.  Then strict seclusion.  Occasionally you can have a Parivrajaka life for a
few days to test the strength of your mind.

95.    I  am  a  married  man.    I  have  a  great  desire  to  become  a  Sannyasin.    I  am
disgusted with the family life. I recently lost my child.  My wife too is a pious lady. Suppose
I take Sannyasa, can I live with her and do spiritual Sadhana?

Now you are not fit for Sannyasa, though you might have a minute trace of Vairagya due
to the death of your child.  After Sannyasa, you should not live with your wife.  You should not
remain even in your own place, as Moha will be lurking in a corner of your mind.  Old worldly
Samskaras will be ever waiting to dupe you.  Maya is powerful.  You will have to spend all your
energy in waging a guerilla war against old Samskaras and temptations.  You will have no energy
for spiritual practices.  Though you may think that you possess a high degree of Vairagya and that
your wife also is pious, yet you should be far away from her.  You should not even think of her.
That is real Sannyasa.  What is the meaning of taking Sannyasa and living with your wife and
children?  How can you destroy Moha, worldly Samskaras and Vasanas?

96.  Sometimes, due to cold or some such reason, one of my nostrils gets clogged and
the breath does not flow clear and there comes some difficulty in doing Pranayam.  What
shall I do to make the breath flow freely?

Insert the end of a thread into the nostril.  You will begin to sneeze.  This will clear the
passage.  Or lie down for five minutes on the left side if the right nostril is clogged.  This also
will relieve.  Do four rounds of Bhastrika Pranayam.  You will be all right.

97.  What is the difference between Jivatman and Paramatman?

Jivatman  is  the  individual  soul,  a  reflection  of  Brahman  in  Avidya  or  the  mind.
Paramatman  is  the  Supreme  Soul,  Brahman  or  the  Atman.    From  the  empirical  viewpoint,  the
Jivatman is a finite and conditioned being, while the Paramatman is the infinite, eternal, Sat-chit-
ananda  Brahman.    In  essence,  the  Jivatman  is  identical  with  Paramatman  when  Avidya  is
destroyed.

98.  Why has God created young beautiful women?  There must be some sense in
His creation.  We should enjoy them and procreate as many as possible.  We should keep
up the  progeny  of  the  line.    If  all  people  become  Sannyasins  and  go  to  forests,  what  will
become of this world?

These beautiful women and wealth are the instruments of Maya to delude you and entrap
you into the nets.  If you wish to remain always as a worldly man with low thoughts, debasing
desires, you can by all means do so.  You are at perfect liberty.  You can marry three hundred and

34

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

fifty wives and procreate as many children.  Nobody can check you.  But you will soon find that
this world cannot give you the satisfaction you want, because all objects are conditioned in time,
space and causation.  There are death, disease, old age, cares, worries and anxieties, fear, loss,
disappointment,  failure,  heat,  cold,  snake-bites,  scorpion-stings,  abuse,  earthquakes,  accidents,
etc.  You cannot at all find rest of mind even for a single second.  As your mind is filled with
passion and impurity, your understanding is clouded and your intellect is perverted now.  You are
not able to understand the illusory nature of the universe and the everlasting bliss of Atma.

Passion can be effectively checked.  There are potent methods.  After checking passion,

you will enjoy real bliss from within(cid:190)

from Atma.

All men cannot become Sannyasins.  They have various ties and attachments.  They are
passionate and cannot, therefore, leave the world.  They are pinned to their wives, children and
property.  Your proposition is wholly wrong.  It is Asambhava, impossible.  Have you ever heard
in the annals of the world’s history that this world had become vacant as all men had become
Sannyasins?  Then, why do you bring in this absurd proposition?  This is an ingenious trick of
your  mind  to  support  your  foolish  arguments  and  Satanic  philosophy  which  has  passion  and
sexual gratification as its important tenets.  Do not  talk  like  this  in  future.    This  exposes  your
foolishness  and  passion-nature.    Do  not  bother  yourself  about  this  world.    Mind  your  own
business.  God is all-powerful.  Even if this world is completely evacuated when all people retire
to forests, God will immediately create crores of people by mere willing, within the twinkling of
an eye.  This is not your look-out.  Find out methods to eradicate your passion.

99.  Through which opening does the soul leave the body?

So long as Prana pulls up and Apana pulls down the life-forces, there is continuity of life.
But, the moment either of these becomes weaker, there is an exit of the life-force.  If the Apana
gives way, then the Jiva will pass out of the body through either the head or the nose or the ear or
the mouth.  If the Prana gives way, then it will pass out of the body through the anus.

100.  What is astral body?

The astral body is the subtle body which is within this physical body like the bladder of a
football.    It  is  an  exact  counterpart  of  the  physical  body.    It  is  made  up  of  the  five  organs  of
action, the five organs of knowledge, the five Pranas, mind, intellect, Chitta or the subconscious
mind, and Ahankar or egoism.  Some call it “the double”.  It is this astral body that comes out of
the  physical  body  after  death  and  moves  to  heaven.    Death  of  this  astral  body  through  the
knowledge of the Eternal frees one from the cycle of births and deaths.

101.  There are 70 lakhs of Sadhus in India and many crores of rupees are spent in
vain in feeding these Sadhus.  Every Sadhu or a Sannyasin is a parasite on society.  Even a
Sannyasin should work in the political field.  There is no necessity for a life of seclusion or
the order of Sannyas or Nivritti Marga.  We want workers only.

35

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

This is a sad mistake.  The Census Report is false.  Beggars are included in  the  list  of
Sannyasins and Sadhus.  Real Sannyasins are rare.  They can be counted on the finger-tips.  A
real Sannyasin is the only mighty potentate of this earth.  He never takes anything.  He always
gives.  It was Sannyasins only who did glorious sublime work in the past.  It is Sannyasins only
who can work wonders in the present and in the future also.  Sri Sankara’s name can never be
obliterated as long as the world lasts.  It was Swami Dayananda, it was Swami Vivekananda, it
was  Swami  Rama  Tirtha,  it  was  Ramakrishna  Paramahamsa,  who  disseminated  the  sublime
teachings of the scriptures and preserved the Hindu religion.  A Sannyasin alone can do any real
Lokasangraha, because he has divine knowledge, he is a whole-timed man.  One real Sannyasin
can  change  the  destiny  of  the  whole  world.    It  was  one  mighty  Sankara  who  established  the
doctrine of Kevala Advaita.  He still lives in our hearts.

Paramahamsas lived on a few pieces of bread and in exchange moved from door to door
and spread the sublime teachings of Vedanta, the Upanishads, the Ramayana and the Bhagavata
throughout the length and breadth of India.  The world is under a great debt of gratitude to them.
Their writings are still a guide to us.  Study a few Slokas or verses of the Avadhuta Gita.  You
will at once be raised to magnanimous heights of divine splendour and glory.  You will become a
changed man.  Depression, weakness, anxieties and tribulations will vanish at once.

Just  as  there  are  research  scholars  or  post-graduate  students  in  science,  psychology,
biology and philosophy, there should be post-graduate Yogins and Sannyasins who will devote
their time to study and meditation, to research on Atma.  These post-graduate Yogins will give to
the world their experiences and realizations in the field of religion.  They will train students and
send them into the world for preaching.

It is the duty of householders, Zamindars, Rajas and Maharajas to look after the wants of
these Sannyasins.  In turn, these Sannyasins will take care of their souls.  Thus the wheel of the
world will revolve smoothly.  There will be peace in the land.

Every  religion  has  a  band  of  anchorites  who  lead  the  life  of  seclusion  and  meditation.
There are Bhikshus in Buddhism, Fakirs in Mohammedanism, Sufistic Fakirs in Sufism, Fathers
and Reverends in Christianity.  The glory of a religion will be lost absolutely if you remove these
hermits or Sannyasins or those who lead a life of renunciation and divine contemplation.  It is
these people who maintain or preserve the religions of the world.  It is these people who  give
solace to the householders when the latter are in trouble and distress.  They are the harbingers of
divine  wisdom  and  peace.    They  are  the  messengers  of  Atmic  knowledge.  They  are  the
disseminators  of  the  Adhyatmic  science  and  the  Upanishadic  revelations.    They  heal  the  sick,
comfort the forlorn, nurse the bedridden.  They bring hope to the hopeless, joy to the depressed,
strength to the weak and courage to the timid by imparting the knowledge of the Vedanta and the
significance of the “Tat Tvam Asi” Mahavakya.

Political  Svarajya  has  been  achieved;  but  can  it  give  real  lasting  peace  and  freedom  to
man?  Can this political  Svarajya  eradicate  human  sufferings  and  ignorance  in  toto?    Can  this
political Svarajya solve the real problems of life?  It can give a little more comfort to man.  He
can have more butter, bread and jam.  He will be still miserable and unhappy, because he is still

36

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

sunk in ignorance; he has no knowledge of the Self. Knowledge of the Self alone can give real
lasting  happiness  and  abiding  bliss.    Atma  Svarajya  or  realization  of  Atma  or  one’s  own  Self
alone can make a man really independent and immortal.  Atma Svarajya alone can give him real
freedom, suzerainty and perfect satisfaction.

Even  those  who  work  in  the  political  field  should  live  in  the  spirit  of  the  Gita  and  the
Upanishads.    They  should  have  ethical  training,  self-control,  self-sacrifice,  spiritual  discipline
and understanding of their real nature before they enter the political field.  They should practice
the three kinds of Tapas(cid:190)
physical, verbal and mental(cid:190) mentioned in the Gita and the Yama and
Niyama of Patanjali Maharshi.  They should clearly have a comprehensive understanding of the
immortality  of  the  soul,  the  illusory  nature  of  this  world,  the  unity  of  Atma  or  oneness  of
consciousness, oneness of life.  They should understand that the whole world is one family only.
Then only they can really serve the country and their own selves.

102.  Krishna is not the Lord. He is not an Avatar.  He was a passionate cowherd

who lustfully played with the Gopis.

What was the age of Lord Krishna at that time?  Was He not a boy of seven?  Can there
be a tinge of passion in Him?  Who can understand the secret of Rasa Lila and Madhurya Bhav,
the  culmination  of  the  highest  Bhakti,  Atmanivedan  or  total  surrender  to  the  Lord?    It  is  only
Narada,  Suka  Deva,  Chaitanya,  Mira,  Hafiz,  Ramananda  and  the  Sakhis  or  Gopis  that  can
understand  the  secret  of  Rasa  Lila.    The  Sakhis  only  are  qualified  for  this.    Did  He  not  play
miracles when he was a boy?  Did He not show that He was the Avatara of Lord Hari?  Did He
not show Virat Darshan to His mother when He was a baby?  Did He not kill the Kaliya serpent
by standing on its hood?  Did He not multiply Himself as countless Krishnas?  Who were the
Gopis?    Were  they  not  God-intoxicated  beings  who  saw  Krishna  alone  everywhere,  who  saw
themselves also as Krishna?  The sound of the Murali could throw them into a state of divine
ecstasy or holy communion.  They were above body consciousness.

103.  Sri Rama is only an ordinary man.  He is not an incarnation of God.  He wept
bitterly when he lost his wife.  His bewailings rent the clouds when Lakshmana fell down
on  the  ground  in  an  unconscious  state,  being  struck  by  the  arrow  of  Indrajit.    Why  did
Rama,  the  Supreme  Being,  forget  his  real  divine  nature?    He  was  sunk  in  the  ocean  of
sorrow at the ordeal of Sita.  If Rama always knew his true Self, why did he grieve for the
loss of Sita?

The answer to this question is that verily Rama was the Supreme Self.  He never moved

or did anything.  He was never subject to joy or sorrow, birth or death, pleasure or pain.

But, throughout his life, Sri Rama behaved like an ordinary man only. He had to do that,
because Ravana had a boon that he could not be killed by Devas, Asuras, Rakshasas, Yakshas,
serpents, bears, etc.  Ravana, in his pride, had belittled the strength of man and Ravana could be
killed only by a man.  So Sri Rama had to show that he was an ordinary man only.  Otherwise, if
Rama had exhibited himself to be a god, according to the boon of Brahma, he would have been
disqualified for destroying Ravana.

37

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

104.  Can a departed spirit take any material form?

Yes.  All spirits do not possess the power of materialization.  Only advanced spirits that
are endowed with psychic power are able to materialize.  They take human form, sit in the chair
in the seance and shake hands with those who sit in the seance.  They talk also.  The touch is as
tangible and warm as that of a living human body.  In a short time, the hand of the spirit melts
away.  Photographs of the spirits also have been taken.

105.  I would like to know very much where my husband’s soul is at present.  I shall
be obliged if you could explain to me what happens to the soul after death and what merits
we  could  do  for  the  peace  of  the  departed  soul  and  whether  he  could  see  or  hear  us,
mortals.  Is there any truth in what the spiritualists say that we could commune with the
dead through a thing called ‘medium’ and is it really the dead person who answers?

Do not allow yourself to be fascinated by spiritualism, mediumship, crystal crazing, etc.
They will lead you astray.  Communication with the dead and talking with the dead are all fads
which have no connection with real spirituality.  The purpose of life is different.  The goal is to
realize the essential imperishability of your Self.  This alone will confer perfect bliss and peace.

The spirit is neither born nor does it die.  Like a person passing from one room to another,
the soul passes from one plane of existence to another.  In the period between death and rebirth,
the  individual  works  out  a  certain  portion  of  his  Karmas  in  subtler  spheres.    At  the  appointed
time, the soul takes up a new body again.

The  best  means  of  ensuring  peace  for  the  departed  is  to  do  Kirtan,  increase  your  Japa,

relieve other people’s distress by selfless service and charity, and do earnest prayer.

Do not try to commune with the departed soul of your husband.  Communion with the
departed soul will stand in the way of its onward march to higher blissful regions and make it
earth-bound.  Do not try to drag your husband down.  It will disturb his peace.  The spirit-guide
which controls the medium is ignorant and deceitful.  It utters falsehood.

106.    We  should  direct  all  our  energies  in  gaining  economic  betterment  for  the
masses.  If we do not waste time and energy in propagating spiritual ideas, Gita studies and
Sankirtan, but devote that energy to the above end, then we shall get economic betterment
earlier, after which those who wish can pursue philosophy and religion.

We should develop our material and physical powers and get to the same peak  of
progress, power and comfort as the Western nations before we can dabble in philosophy
and the like.

Two types of workers, social and religious, are necessary in this world.  Social workers
will work in their own fields of activity.  Religious workers will carry on special propaganda and
dissemination of spiritual knowledge.  A carpenter has his own field of work and an electrician
has his own field.  You cannot ask a carpenter to do the work of an electrician and the electrician

38

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

to  do  the  work  of  a  carpenter.    Social,  economic,  political  and  industrial  development  and
constructive work in those directions are very necessary.  These should not be ignored.

But, religion only can save people.  Without religion, man is nowhere.  Even those who
work  in  the  other  fields  cannot  turn  out  good  work  without  disciplining  themselves,  without
having  a  spiritual  basis,  without  undergoing  a  religious  training,  without  practicing  Ahimsa,
Satyam and Brahmacharya.  Leaders who are selfish and corrupt spoil the society.  They fight for
their own superiority and power.

Bread, butter,  jam  and  nice  biscuits  cannot  give  you  everlasting  peace.    Comforts  are
enemies of spiritual life and peace.  They pull a man down.  After all, man wants very little on
this earth.  You will think of God only when you are in adversities.  What is wanted is spiritual
wealth which is inexhaustible.

That work which removes the ignorance of man and gives him happiness can eradicate
human  sufferings  in  toto  and  give  him  eternal  happiness.    That  work  is  spiritual  propaganda.
That  work  is  the  dissemination  of  Bhakti  and  knowledge  of  Yoga  and  Vedanta.    It  is  the
crowning glory of human activities.  This is the greatest Yajna or Yoga.  This is Jnana Yajna, the
highest of all Yajnas.

India alone possesses the supreme divine wealth.  Even the richest people of the different
parts of the world come to the Himalayas to practice Yoga, to seek the guidance of Rishis, seers,
Yogis and sages and to acquire this imperishable wealth.

Happiness  does  not  come  from  wealth.    The  Western  nations  are  quite  restless  despite
their enormous wealth. From this we can infer that spiritual life alone can give real, everlasting
peace and happiness.

107.  How does the Yogi see the subtle rudiments of matter with his Yogic vision?

As you would see the material objects with the help of a material instrument in the form
of the eye, the Yogi would see subtler objects through the help of subtler instruments.  Except in
the plane of intuition, in all other lower planes, there exists a subject-object relationship as far as
cognition is concerned.  The only thing is: the instrument used in perceiving the object should be
of the same material of which the object of perception is made.

For further grasping of the exact vision of the Yogi, you yourself should become one.

108.  When everything is predestined and pre-planned by the Lord, why does man
endeavour to do and undo things?  Should one’s repeated failures in respect of a certain
work be also taken as the Will of the Lord?  Is it a fact that we get what we deserve or is it
that we are not really fit for what we actually aspire for?  This doubt is eluding a clear-cut
answer from my own limited brain. I refer the same to your greater brain to re solve this
doubt and I hope you will do so.

39

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

It  is  true  that  everything  is  predestined  and  pre-planned  by  the  Lord;  and  only  in
accordance  with  the  holy  writ,  everything  takes  place.    God  has  given  free  will  also  to  the
individual to do right or wrong, to discriminate between the Preyo Marga and the Sreyo Marga.
If  one  is  endowed  with  true  wisdom  as  to  the  fleeting  and  painful  nature  of  the  worldly
enjoyments, one can exert oneself in the right direction to do or undo his Prarabdha, the portion
of Karmas ripened for actual experience in this current birth.  Without the Lord’s special grace,
none can make or mar himself.  Even for realization, the Lord’s grace is necessary.  For obtaining
the  Lord’s  grace,  intense  Purusha  Prayatna,  otherwise  known  as  Purushartha,  which  is  voiced
forth throughout the famous “Yoga Vasishtha” is to be put forth..

Whether it be failure or success in any undertaken work, it is but the effect of the Lord’s
grace and will alone.  Accept everything in the light of Vedantic indifference.  Be a silent witness
and rejoice over the mystery of the Lord.

Everybody gets what he actually deserves; nothing more, nothing less.  The Divine Law is
altogether  different  from  man-made  law.    The  Law  and  Verdict  and  Judgement  of  the  Lord  is
final and unquestionable.  No bribing business there.  His Law is always impartial and uniform
and even, with the whole of mankind, why only mankind, with the whole of His own creation.

Aspiration on the mundane side is but an expression of egoism that bursts forth in every
moment of man’s life through actions, thoughts and speech.  Unless it is, as already stated, willed
by the Lord, nothing mundane or spiritual is possible of attainment by any human being on earth.
God  actually  helps  those  that  help  themselves,  provided  that  the  thing  aspired  for  is  in  strict
conformity with the  injunctions  of  the  holy  writ.    From  the  cradle  to  the  grave,  from  birth  till
death, from the moment of awareness to that of eternal rest, the guiding factor of man should be
self-effort, self-effort, self-effort and self-effort alone, based on surrender, without minding the
results.

109.  Though I have attended Satsang all these years and though I have been doing
Japa and Dhyana all these years, I have not yet a confirmed belief in God and His Name.
There is yet Moha for family, for position, for money and for worldly life.   It  is  strange,
Swamiji, I confess.

Maya  is  powerful,  and  except  in  very  rare  cases  where  the  Samskaras  are  very  strong,
taste for a life of contemplation does not manifest itself in man.  No doubt, Satsang, Japa and
Dhyana help a Sadhak a lot.  But the Avarana of Avidya or the veil of ignorance is so thick that
these  are  not  sufficient  to  pierce  it.    They  only  create  Samskaras  which  take  shape  in  future
births.  But, if at the same time you do Vichara, develop Viveka and cultivate Vairagya, then the
progress is extremely rapid.  Vairagya and Viveka are absolutely necessary.  Without these, no
amount of Satsang, Japa or Dhyana will produce immediate results.  Maya is extremely powerful:
she can be annihilated only through Dridha Vairagya, only through intense dispassion.

110.  Swamiji, of late I am not able to read my class books.  Immediately I take up
my  class  books,  I  feel  that  they  are  not  worth  studying,  since  they  do  not  contain  the
element that would satisfy my hungering soul.

40

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Beloved child!  It is too early for you to renounce the world.  Besides, you have got your
parents.  You should serve them nicely.  Earn your livelihood by honest means.  Work hard.  At
the  same  time,  adopt  the  Nimitta  Bhav:  work  as  an  instrument  in  His  hands.    Cultivate  this.
Carry on your studies also.  No doubt, knowledge of this phenomenal world would not confer
Moksha on you.  Yet, it has got its own uses.  Nothing is bad in itself; it is the use to which a
particular branch of knowledge is put that matters.

Try to carry on your personal Sadhana also side by side.  Practice my Twenty Important
Spiritual Instructions to the best of your ability.  Maintain the spiritual diary.  Always keep the
goal in view.  When the time comes, God Himself will facilitate your renunciation.

111. How are life and meditation intermingled?

There is no man in the world who is not divine by nature.  The divinity in man differs
only in degree, but not in kind.  Even the so-called atheist has got a ray of divinity in him.  No
man is devoid of the three Gunas(cid:190) Sattva, Rajas and Tamas(cid:190)
in varying proportions.  Whether
one is a skeptic or an atheist or a nihilist or some other, that portion of Sattva that abides in man
helps him do some virtuous actions, which result in further actions of like nature, either in this
birth or in some future births.  While he does actions of Rajas and Tamas, he also does Sattvic
actions  according  to  the  degree  of  purity  and  Sattva  in  him.    No  man  in  the  world(cid:190)
be  he  a
robber, a thief, a pirate or some other(cid:190)
commits vicious actions alone.  Every man commits both
virtuous actions and vicious actions in life.  That is, he is prone to do mixed actions so long as he
is under the grip of Prakriti.  When virtuous actions are done, his mind naturally turns towards
the divine, however slightly it be.  A sense of inner joy he experiences, though he may not be
able  to  express  why.    Meditation  is  essentially  the  quality  of  Sattva.    When  life  is  made
ennobling, sure is the man to think of God.

In this connection, the point worthy of remembrance is that Sattvic actions themselves are
to  be  considered  as  worship  or  meditation.    Meditation  need  not  necessarily  mean  sitting  in  a
lonely corner or sequestered spot and thinking over Rama or Krishna or Jesus or Mohammed or
pouring forth verbal or mental prayers.  Actions that tend to purify the grossness of the individual
are to be collectively treated as meditation.  Life is thus meditation coupled with Ajnana to an
immeasurable degree in the case of an ordinary individual.  If meditation is deliberately taken up
on the instructions of a Guru who ought necessarily to be a more evolved soul, man cannot but
perform  good  and  selfless  actions  with  Akartritva  (non-doership)  and  Abhoktritva  (non-
enjoyership)  Bhavas  to  make  and  feel  his  life  more  and  more  cheerful,  more  and  more
enlightening, more and more attractive.  In the latter course which is but a deliberate step, man
evolves more quickly with the speed of lightning, while in the former course man moves forward
with the pace of a snail.

Thus, life and meditation are intertwined.

112.  Apart from the Guru,  do  you  think  that  a  mediator  is  necessary  in  order  to

enable us to attain Self-realization?

41

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Yes, yes.  That is the Tutelary Deity or Ishta Devata.  The mind cannot all at once rise
beyond itself.  The ego will seldom cut its own throat.  Your consciousness will find it a hard
task  to  realize  the  Cosmic  Consciousness.    Therefore  the  Name  and  the  Form  of  a  Deity  are
chosen to meditate upon.  In due time, this Deity will manifest Itself before you and do the work
of annihilating the ego and the mind, enabling you to realize Cosmic Consciousness.

113.  What is the need to attain Moksha, Swamiji?

To understand this you should resort to Satsang and study of scriptures.  An intellect that
is clouded by all sorts of desires and evil Samskaras will not be able to grasp even the need for
Moksha.  Such an intellect is Asuric.  Read the Gita.  Attend Satsang.  Listen to the discourses of
saints and Sannyasins.  Then Viveka will arise in you.  You will understand that this world is full
of pain and sorrow.  The bungalow, the motor-car, the little position and the small salary that you
are having now will not then satisfy you.  Your aspirations will grow.  You will want to liberate
yourself.

What  great  labour  goes  into  the  preparation  of  the  microscope  lens?    After  a  lot  of
grinding only you are able to peep into the beyond.  Similarly, after a lot of study and Satsang
only will your intellect even think of the Beyond.

114.    Can  a  man  not  lead  a  good,  virtuous  life,  be  charitable,  truthful  and  noble,
work for the welfare of the community and die a good man, without aspiring for anything
beyond this life?

If you lead a virtuous life and die, you will die as a good man, not as a saint.  You will not

attain Moksha.

You  have  hundreds  of  good  men.    But,  how  many  saints  have  you  got?    Even  real
aspirants  are  rare  in  the  world  now.    Even  in  your  category  of  “good  men”,  there  are  grades.
How many good men have you got of Gandhiji’s type?

What do your good men do?  They may be truthful and noble; they may be charitable and
pious.  But, even they will be selfish at the core.  They will hoard wealth and look after only their
own wife and children.  Will they feel that all children are theirs?  When they bring sweetmeats
from the bazaar, will they give to other people’s children first? No, no.  Because they have no
knowledge of the truth that the One Self dwells in all beings.  Unless this understanding of the
Truth  dawns  on  them,  unless  they  meditate  upon  this  Supreme  Reality  and  strive  to  realize  It,
how can they develop renunciation and the true spirit of selfless service?

To be a good man is no doubt a better ideal than  to  be  merely  a  human  animal  full  of
vicious qualities.  But it is only a means to an end; it is only a step nearer the goal, not the end or
the goal itself.  The goal is Self-realization  or  Moksha.    In  order  to  achieve  that,  you  must  be
good and do good; and you must do more(cid:190)
you must cultivate discrimination, dispassion and a

42

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

correct  attitude  to  life;  you  must  meditate,  do  Japa  and  Kirtan,  study  scriptures.    Then  by  the
grace of God, you will attain the goal!

115.  What is the technique of concentration on the 18 parts of the body as advised

by Sage Yajnavalkya for the purpose of attaining Pratyahara?  Please explain fully.

The  technique  of  concentration  as  given  by  Sage  Yajnavalkya  involves  a  process  of
withdrawing the mind and Prana gradually and step by step from one part of the body to another,
starting from the two big toes of the feet and progressing upward by a series of successive acts of
such  concentration-cum-withdrawal,  through  the  several  occult  centers  of  the  body,  leading
finally to the crown of the head.

By  this  process,  the  mind  and  Prana  are  totally  drawn  away  from  the  entire  body  and

finally centered in the top of the head where the practitioner dives into deep meditation.

The 18 parts mentioned by Sage Yajnavalkya are given below:

1.   The   great toes
2.   The ankles
3.   The middles of the shanks
4.   The parts above the shanks and below the knees
5.   The centers of the knees
6.   The centers of the thighs
7.   The anus
8.   The center of the body, just below the waist
9.   The genitals
10. The navel
11. The heart
12. The pit of the throat
13. The root of the palate
14. The root of the nose
15. The eyeballs
16. The centre of the eyebrows
17. The forehead
18. The crown of the head.

It is when the senses are active that the mind becomes outgoing.  Thus, concentration is
retarded.  The senses are made active by the play of Prana.  With the withdrawal of Prana, the
different  parts  of  the  body  are  rendered  quiescent  and  their  activity  inhibited.    Here,  in  this
technique, the effective withdrawal of Prana is achieved by the withdrawal of the mind.  It is not
so much by a process of Pranayam as by making use of the interconnection between Prana and
the mind that this withdrawal of Prana is effected.  When the mind is firmly withdrawn after a
short spell of deep concentration upon a particular part, automatically, together with the ingoing
mind, the Prana too gets withdrawn.  Prana follows the mind.

43

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Thus, stage by stage, the Prana is withdrawn from the big toes upwards right up until it
reaches the region of the crown of the head by which time the meditator is as it were, oblivious of
the body.  In this state, the meditation proceeds undisturbed and becomes very effective.

This is one of the processes to enter into undisturbed and intense Dhyana.  Sit upon your
Dhyana Asan.  Create the right mood and Bhava by a little chanting of the Pranava Mantra, Om.
Next,  negate  the  entire  phenomenal  universe,  including  this  earth.    When  you  reach  the  state
where you are aware only of the body, then commence this process of withdrawal.

Closing your eyes, first direct your entire mind upon the two big toes.  Concentrate there.
Then gradually draw up the mind from the region of the toes to the next point, viz., the ankles.
Now concentrate here.  Then withdraw yourself to the third point, i.e., the middle of the shanks.
Concentrate here.  Next withdraw into the fourth part, and so on.  After a few days’ progress,
depending  upon  the  interest  and  the  earnestness  with  which  you  do  it,  you  will  be  able  to  go
through the entire series of 18 parts and reach the seat of meditation on the crown of the head
within a short time after taking up your seat in the meditation pose.

116.  Swamiji, I feel I have not understood the Mahavakyas and their significance

properly.

I will explain it to you.  Listen attentively.

The  first  Mahavakya  is:  “Prajnanam  Brahma.    Consciousness  is  Brahman”.    This  is
Lakshana  Vakya.    The  teacher  gives  the  definition  to  the  student  that  pure  consciousness  is
Brahman.

Then the teacher says:  “Tat  Tvam  Asi.    Thou  art  That.    You  are  the  all-pervading  pure

consciousness”.  This is known as Upadesa Vakya.

Then the student contemplates on what the teacher expounded, in the form of the idea,

“Aham Brahmasmi.  I am Brahman”.  This is Anusandhana Vakya.

Finally, the student realizes that this Self which is within him is Brahman: “Ayam Atma

Brahma.  This Atma is Brahman”.  This is Anubhava Vakya.

Have you understood now?

117.    I  write  to  inform  you  that  due  to  excessive  practice  of  Nauli  and  Uddiyana
Bandha  and  Pranayam,  the  intestines  of  my  abdomen  are  aching  very  severely.    It  is
difficult even to lie on the sides and breathing has become difficult.  In spite of all this, I am
regularly carrying on my Yogic exercises and Kriyas.  Kindly write immediately if there is
any  cause  for  alarm.    Also  suggest  some  prescription  to  get  rid  of  this  excessive  pain  on
both sides of the lungs.

44

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

There is absolutely no cause for alarm owing to the pain that you experience now.  Give
up  Nauli  and  Uddiyan  for  three  or  four  days.    You  can  practice  even  Pranayam  without  any
break, but mind that the Bhastrik type is given up during this period.  Have some respite.  Do not
go to excesses.  Bear in mind the saying, “Ati Sarvatra Varjayet”.  Excess should ever be given
up in any matter.  Stick to the golden mean.

As regards the type of Pranayam, Sukh Purvak will do for the present, i.e., till such time

as you feel better.  You will be all right if you give some rest to the abdominal viscera.

When  you  consider  yourself  as  having  attained  the  normal  condition,  take  to  all  the
Bandhas, Mudras, Kriyas and Bhastrik Pranayam which you may have been practicing.  Be ever
moderate  keeping  in  view  that  you  achieve  substantial  progress  only  by  modest  and  sincere
efforts and not by immediate, undesirable and indiscreet practices to gain blissful experiences in
the twinkling of an eye!

Have open-air walk.  Lie on the back in Savasan (corpse pose).  Repeat your Ishta Mantra
to invoke the blessings of the Lord.  Foment the affected parts (ribs) with hot water, with a little
turpentine  added  to  it.    Sprinkle  powder  talcum.    After  fomentation,  you  can  besmear  some
greasy oil.  Relief is sure to ensue.

118.  Why are Sadhus and Sannyasins enjoined upon to beg for their food?  Don’t
the sins and evil intentions of the giver of food get mixed up with his charity and thus spoil
the mental peace of the Sadhus and Sannyasins by their contaminating influence?

A true Sadhu or a genuine Sannyasin is he who has no attachment to the world even in
the slightest degree.  Such Sadhus are Brahma-Nishtha Purushas (persons in the constant thought
of  the  Divine  or  Brahman)  unmindful  of  their  bare  needs  even.    They  should  not  cook  for
themselves.  Self-cooking induces in any person a desire to prepare this dish or that, to relish this
sweet  dainty  or  that.    It  causes  Jihva  Chapalya  (unsteadiness  of  the  tongue).    The  aim  of  all
Sadhanas  being  to  control  the  mind,  for  which  control  of  the  tongue  is  the  best  means,  self-
cooking is prohibited to the Sadhu and the Sannyasin; and in lieu thereof, begging, just to fill up
the belly moderately, is allowed.  So, begging is no sin for a Sadhu and a Sannyasin.

The fire of Tapas consequent upon Japa, Pranayam, Svadhyaya of the Bhagavata and the
like burns all impurities that are likely to affect the God-intoxicated when they take food from ill-
evolved and undeveloped souls(cid:190)

be they Brahmins or Pariahs.

119.    Why  are  philosophers  called  mad?    Is  there  something  wrong  with  the

philosophers or the people who call them so?

Compared to the man-of-the-world, a philosopher is a mad person in the sense that the
latter cannot take a lively interest in external appearance as the former does.  To the philosopher,
the external world is only an appearance, but to the man-of-the-world, it is all real and eternal.
There  is  nothing  wrong  with  either  of  them,  since  the  word  ‘mad’  is  used  only  as  a  mutual,

45

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

relative attribute.  What the philosopher says, the layman cannot believe; and what the layman
experiences, the philosopher cannot.

120.  Swamiji, how did Maya arise in Brahman?

This is an Ati-prasna or transcendental question. You will find this question coming up to
your mind in various forms: When did Karma begin?  When and  why  was  the  world  created?
Why is there evil in the world?  Why did the Unmanifest manifest itself?  And so on.  The same
question  is  asked  by  Rama  in  Yoga  Vasishtha  and  Vasishtha  says:  “You  are  putting  the  cart
before the horse.  You will not be benefited by an enquiry into this question at all.  Meditate and
realize Brahman.  You Will then know the answer to this question.  The problem itself will have
dissolved by then”.  No one  can  answer  this  question.    When  Knowledge  dawns,  the  question
itself vanishes.  Therefore there is no answer to the question at all.

The Brahma Sutra says: Lokavat Tu Lila Kaivalyam. It is only to pacify your doubt.  It is
really not an answer; for, there can be no answer.  Yet, the question will arise in the case of every
seeker  after  Truth.    You  cannot  help  it.    You  will  have  to  use  your  discrimination,  pacify  the
doubt,  and  then  through  intense  Sadhana  and  meditation,  realize  God.    Then  the  doubt  will
vanish.  A great Yogi and Jnani was worried with this doubt for twelve years.  Then he told me:
“The worry is over now.  It troubled me for twelve years.  I could not find an answer.  So I have
given  up  that  pursuit  and  have  taken  to  meditation,  Japa  and  Kirtan.    Now  I  find  peace  and
progress”.    Faith  in  the  Guru,  in  the  Grant  Sahib,  Kirtan,  Japa,  meditation  and  practice  of
righteousness(cid:190)
these will enable you to progress in the spiritual path and will take you to That
where there is no questioning possible.

121.  I quite realize that contentment gives peace.  But I have a doubt.  It I become
contented, all my ambitions will die.  I will become lethargic and lazy.  On account of my
various  ambitions,  I  move  about  hither  and  thither,  I  exert  and  I  am  energetic.    Kindly
remove this doubt of mine.  I am quite bewildered.

Contentment  can  never  make  you  idle.    It  is  a  Sattvic  virtue  that  propels  man  towards
God.  It gives strength of mind and peace.  It checks unnecessary and selfish exertions.  It opens
the inner eye of man and moves his mind towards divine contemplation.  It turns his energy in
the  inner,  Sattvic  channels.    It  transmutes  the  gross  energy,  viz.,  greed,  that  is  forcing  man
towards selfish exertions into spiritual energy, Ojas.  That man who is contented is full of Sattva.
He  is  more  energetic  now.    He  is  inward.    He  has  an  inner  life  in  the  Atman.  He  is  always
peaceful.  He turns out more work calmly and with one-pointed mind.  All the dissipated rays of
the mind are collected now.  Do you understand the point now?

It is on the strength of contentment that the Sadhus and Sannyasins, and the Fakirs and
Bhikshus move about in the world in a care-free manner by living on Bhiksha.  It is contentment
that gives strength to an aspirant to walk in the path of Self-realization and emboldens him  to
march fearlessly in the rugged and thorny path of spirituality.

46

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

122.  In all matters with which it is connected, science gives us a precise account of
how a particular thing is constructed and how it grows.  We are also given the successive
signs that mark the growth.  Are there, in the practice of Yoga, any definite indication to
measure the aspirant’s progress(cid:190)
for instance, some experiences that he would have after,
say, three months of practice, others which he would come upon after a year, and so on?

Various  Yogas  give  various  experiences.    The  practice  of  Pranayam  and  Hatha  Yogic
Kriyas,  for  instance,  would  give  a  graded  series  of  psychic  experiences.    Seeing  all  kinds  of
ethereal lights and hearing certain Anahata sounds belong to this category.  Here, the sages who
have  propounded  these  Yogas  have  given  very  definite  stages  of  spiritual  experience.    As  the
Kundalini passes from Chakra to Chakra,  the  Yogi  has  certain  definite,  verifiable  experiences.
That is because each Chakra governs a particular Tattva, and its mastery, therefore, gives specific
experiences.

Similarly, in Tantrik Sadhana also, they have been able to give a definite chart of spiritual
experiences.  Each Sadhana has its own particular Siddhi; and therefore, the experiences of all
Sadhaks following a particular Sadhana are invariably the same.

But,  these  are  all  lower  experiences  of  an  inferior  type.    They  are  psychic  experiences
which  need  not  necessarily  denote  the  aspirant’s  spiritual  progress.    Even  the  Bhakta’s
experiences of horripilation, shedding of tears, etc., though  they  are  not  so  perfectly  graded  as
those of the Hatha Yoga practitioner, do not necessarily indicate spiritual progress.

When you enter the domain of the Spirit, you come into the sphere of the Infinite.  Infinite
are the Yogas and infinite are the experiences too.  Each man’s Yoga is his own.  For, he has
brought his own Samskaras and Vasanas and he strives in his own way to reach the goal.  These
two, interacting on each other, give him his various experiences.  For instance, as he approaches
the  transcendental,  infinite,  immortal  Self,  the  aspirant  would  enjoy  great  inner  peace  and
indescribable happiness.  He is not easily affected by what goes on around him.  Not only this, he
is able to radiate peace and happiness to all those who come into contact with him.  He becomes
good and radiates goodness.  This is the most important sign of spiritual progress.  God is perfect
goodness.    The  aspirant  who  progresses  towards  the  realization  of  God,  therefore,  grows  in
goodness.    His  evil  qualities  slowly  vanish  and  are  replaced  by  sublime  virtues.    If  this  most
essential element is not there, then all other visions and sounds are practically useless.  By his
mere presence the advanced Yogi is able to inspire people to lead a good life, free from hatred
and malice.  His heart is filled with cosmic love, and therefore, he serves all spontaneously and
selflessly.  These are all real signs of spiritual progress.

But,  beyond  all  these,  is  the  ultimate  experience.    That  is  indescribable.    Peace  and
happiness, undisturbed tranquillity of mind(cid:190)
these are all great signs of progress, but they do not
constitute  the  goal.    The  goal  is  to  become  God.    You  must  become  one  with  God.    This  is
achieved  through  ceaseless  practice  of  meditation  after  establishing  oneself  in  virtue  and
goodness.    That  supreme  experience,  when  the  Yogi  feels  he  is  one  with  God,  no  words  can
describe.

47

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

123.    How  was  it  possible  for  Sri  Sankaracharya  to  have  devotion  to  Sakara
Brahman when he was an Advaitin and his philosophical treatises prove that he believed in
the nameless and formless One?

It is because Jnana and Bhakti are essentially the same!  Look at the various Stotras that
he has composed.  They indicate clearly that he had developed devotion to a very high degree.
Atmanivedan or self-surrender leads to Jnana; and Jnana is synonymous with Para Bhakti.

People nowadays condemn Bhakti and think that it is inferior to Jnana Yoga.  They have
no  understanding  of  Bhakti.    They  think  that  they  can  jump  at  once  to  Jnana  Yoga  Sadhana.
They have really no faith in God.  They just acquire some intellectual conception of God.  This
does not serve them.  Jnana Yoga without the necessary preparation is of no use.

124.    Swamiji!    I  find  a  few  places  like  Nagore,  Shirdi,  Tiruvannamalai  and
Rishikesh ever full of Shanti and a kind of spiritual bliss.  May it be, Swamiji, that these
places which have had the impress of the saint’s personality, his Tapasya and Siddhi, on
the very atmosphere, retain that sanctity for a long time?

Yes, yes.  And not only that.  The saint himself may live in those places.  The liberated
sage has the option to merge in Brahman or to live in a subtle form and carry on  the  work  of
Lokasangraha, guiding aspirants, awakening in people a religious fervour and so on.  This motive
is manifested in some Jivanmuktas in accordance with God’s supreme will.  Therefore, the place
in  which  the  saint  practiced  Tapas  and  attained  Siddhi,  which  might  again  be  chosen  by  the
invisible  spirit  of  the  saint  as  its  permanent  abode,  becomes  the  abode  of  the  saint’s  divine
qualities(cid:190)

peace, bliss and wisdom.

125.    The  senses  are  generally  turned  outside.    It  is  said  that  if  they  are  turned

inside, one will be able to attain Mukti.  What is meant by turning them inside?

Now, think of Lord Rama and repeat Ram, Ram.  When you mentally repeat Ram, keep a

picture of Ram.  The senses will be withdrawn.

Now the eyes run towards objects and the ears run to various sounds.  When you repeat
Ram, Ram loudly, the ears hear only Ram, Ram; and they will not run.  The inner eye will see
only Ram’s picture.  The mind will be concentrated on God.  It will not run towards objects.  So,
gaze  within,  introspect.    You  can  do  Pranayam  also.    Stop  the  breath.    It  is  Prana  that  gives
strength to the senses.  You withdraw the Prana and try to centralize it so that the senses have no
vigour to run outside.  By gradual practice, the senses will be absorbed in the mind.  The mind
will  be  concentrated  and  will  be  absorbed  in  the  Self.  That  is  superconscious  state,  Samadhi.
Daily practice.

126.  Is it possible to become absolutely desireless?  The Western psychologists say

that it is impossible to give up all desires.

48

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Western psychologists are babies. In the Yoga Vasishtha and in Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras, it
is  mentioned  that  absolute  desirelessness  is  Moksha.    A  Jivanmukta  has  no  desires.    Desire  is
imperfection.  A Jivanmukta is a perfected soul.  How can there be desires in him?  How can
perfection and imperfection go together?  So, it is quite possible to be free from all desires.

127.  Psychologists do not accept that there is a superconscious state.  They accept

only the conscious and the subconscious states.

An owl says, “There is no light”.  Is there no light?  Similarly, the ‘owl’ professor says
that  there  is  no  superconsciousness.    Because  an  owl  professor  says  that  there  is  no
superconsciousness, does superconsciousness cease to be?  Study Yoga Vasishtha which affirms
the  existence  of  superconsciousness.    He  who  denies  superconsciousness  is  like  the  owl  that
denies light simply because it cannot see light.

128.  I am not able to practice meditation for more than ten minutes.  After that my

mind begins to wander on sensual objects.

When you develop Ruchi or taste for Dhyana and Japa, you will be able to sit longer for
Japa and meditation.  Before going to bed, also in the morning at 4 o’clock, and before taking
meal at noon, you should do Japa and meditation. Just as you take tea three or four times a day,
so also, you should do Japa three or four times a day.  Do not worry if the mind wanders.  By
gradual practice, it will come under your control.  Do Kirtan when the mind wanders much.  Do
Nama-smaran while walking and working also(cid:190)

Sri Ram, Sri Ram.

If  you  are  not  able  to  sit  in  Padmasan  for  long,  you  can  sit  on  a  sofa  and  do  Japa  and

meditation.  It is not necessary that you should sit in Padmasan.

Give  up  onions  and  garlic  completely.    Give  it  up  entirely.    Do  not  prepare  it  at  all  at
home.  If you try to reduce it, one day you will take a little, another day you will be tempted to
take  a  good  quantity!    A  cigarette  addict  who  wants  to  reduce  cigarettes,  takes  a  very  few
cigarettes on some days, but on some other days he smokes heavily, with a vengeance as it were,
and  more  than  compensates  for  the  quantity  foregone  by  him  previously.    Therefore,  give  up
onions completely.

If  you  give  nice  cotton  seeds  and  oil-cakes  to  your  cow,  it  will  cease  to  graze  in  your
neighbour’s fields, it will give up its wandering habit in search of grass and herbs.  Now your
mind is running after Rasagulla and Peda which it has tasted.  But if you give the mind the bliss
of Japa and meditation, it will no more run after worldly objects.  When you develop Ruchi for
Japa and meditation, the mind will give up its wandering habit.

129.  I am in something of a dilemma due to the fact that I do not know what my aim
in life is to be.  I have been told that if I know this, I will find it easier to meditate. Could
you tell me how to discover the answer to this?

49

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

The  aim  of  life  is  God-realization.    To  become  one  with  Jesus  is  the  goal  of  life.    To
transmute  the  brutal  instincts  and  to  become  divine  is  the  goal  of  life.    If  you  control  anger,
eradicate  selfishness  and  develop  tolerance,  compassion,  selflessness,  generosity,  courage,
forgiveness, you will become divine.  Is selfishness good?  No. So become selfless.  Is greediness
good?  Is anger good?  Is lust good?  Is vanity good?  These form the lower nature of man.  So
remove these and become selfless, generous, patient, tolerant, pure and humble.  This is the goal.

130.    Will  not  one  be  violating  one’s  Dharma  by  embracing  Sannyas  and  by  not
discharging his duties to his parents and dependents?  Are one’s relatives really dependent
on him?

The notion that others depend on you is due to sheer delusion.  God alone takes care of
everyone.    Being  deluded,  you  think  that  you  are  supporting  your  kith  and  kin  and  undergo
endless  troubles,  miseries  and  vexations.    Even  if  you  turn  an  anchorite,  God  will  arrange
everything and maintain your family.  And no sin will accrue to you, provided you have intense
Vairagya.  Swami Ram Tirth had burning Vairagya; so he resigned his job, and leaving behind
his wife and two young sons, took to Sannyas.  Similarly, Lord Buddha renounced his kingdom
and turned a recluse.

131.  Can a person really help others in this world, or is it that such an idea is due to
a delusion in the mind?  Is it not true that a man can rise or fall only as a result of his own
Karma  and  that  the  Karmas  of  others  can  have  no  effect  on  him?    Are  not  the
circumstances  that  a  person  meets  with  earned  by  his  own  actions?    Can  a  person  take
initiative and change the circumstances of himself as well as of others?

Surely  one  can  take  the  initiative.    He  can  do  good  to  himself  and  to  others.    He  can
determine the circumstances and environments.  Just see how much one can do for others, how
much one can really assist them in the relative plane.  One can impart knowledge to the illiterate
and the ignorant, extend monetary help to the poor and the needy.

One  can  educate  the  orphans  and  contribute  to  the  institutions  that  take  care  of  the
children.  Indeed, one can spend not only his entire earnings, but something more!  Why should
there  be  any  doubt  in  regard  to  one’s  being  really  helpful  to  others?    Take  the  example  of
Gandhiji.  Did he not do immense service and good to the nation and to the world at large?

132.  What is the easiest method of developing devotion?

The easiest method of developing devotion is to hear again and again the Lord’s Lilas.
Each time you hear the Lord’s Lilas and glories, an image of the Lord is formed in your mind.
And when you go on hearing the glories  of  the  Lord,  in  due  course,  the  Lord’s  image  in  your
mind gets strong and bright, even as the piece of wax which a goldsmith uses for collecting the
gold particles which fall on the ground while cutting gold pieces, accumulates gold in it every
day, and after some days, itself begins to shine like a piece of gold, when the maximum number
of gold particles have stuck to it.  And when the form of the Lord is bright and firm in the mind,
the devotee has ceaseless remembrance of Him and surging devotion for Him.

50

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

133.  Can we practice Kundalini Yoga by ourselves without the direct guidance of a

Guru?

No, that will lead to all kinds of complications.  You should have an expert Guru by your

side to practice Kundalini Yoga.

But why do you worry so much over the awakening of the Kundalini through Hatha Yoga
methods?  Any Sadhana, properly done, will awaken the Kundalini.  Kundalini can be awakened
through Bhakti, through the grace of the Guru, through the constant practice of Nishkama Karma
Yoga, through Vedantic Vichar and through meditation.  Through total self-surrender to the Lord
and  by  becoming  completely  desireless,  you  can  get  all  psychic  powers.    Nama-smaran,
combined with selfless service, is the best Yoga for this age.  You will get the Lord’s grace, and
with His grace, His divine Sakti will flow into you.  What can you not achieve through that ?
These psychic powers are all hindrances and obstacles on the spiritual path.  We should not run
after  them.    If  we  go  on  serving  humanity,  even  if  we  have  unconsciously  acquired  psychic
powers through the practice of Bhakti or Karma Yoga, we will be unconsciously utilizing them
for the good of humanity, without being tainted by them.  That is the best method.

134.  Swamiji Maharaj!  What is your idea about Nirguna Brahman?  Does it mean
only Shunya?  In that case, it does not very much appeal to us.  Who would like to meditate
on nothingness?

Nirguna  is  not  nothingness.    It  is  the  fullness  of  everything  that  is  good.    Nirguna  is
plenitude.    In  it  you  find  all  auspiciousness,  all  goodness,  all  beauty,  all  joy,  all  health,  all
sweetness, all purity, all peace, everything developed to perfection.  From a distance this fullness
becomes  inconceivable  and  so  the  sages  called  it  Nirguna.    Once  they  reach  there,  they  get
merged  in  that  inexpressible  experience.    It  is  not  nothingness,  but  it  is  everythingness,  and
beyond this too, for it is inexpressible.  Only know that all that exists in Maya or false perception,
viz., evil, ugliness, misery, change, birth, decay, death, etc., are not in It.  For, It is beyond Maya.
In Nirguna Brahman, there are no Gunas of Maya, viz.. blue colour, etc.  That is what is meant by
Nirguna.

135.  Swamiji, I have often come across this word ‘Kala’ in the Indian scriptures.

What exactly is meant by it?

It  is  the  Great  Time  personified.    It  is  the  destroyer  of  name  and  form.    In  the  Hindu
pantheon, there are various gods and goddesses who are members of the divine hierarchy.  Just as
we have our government here composed of various ministers and officers, the celestials who rule
the world, too, have their own deities who control the various aspects of creation, preservation
and destruction of this world.  Some are in charge of the various elements like air, fire and water;
some are in charge of birth, death, preservation of life and disease.  Kala or Yama or Dharmaraja
is the Lord of Death.  The entire universe is under his control in a way; for, when the time comes,
he brings about the end of the earthly sojourn of all beings.  It is only the man of Self-realization

51

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

who transcends this Kala and realizes his own Self.  All Sadhana is meant to help us transcend
this Kala, to conquer death, to go beyond time.

136.  Please explain to me what is meant by Cosmic Consciousness.

It is a state of consciousness in which you are aware that God is all that there is, and what
is more, that He is the link that connects all individuals.  God is the Consciousness that illumines
the  entire  creation.    Realization  of  this  Consciousness  or  God  liberates  one  from  bondage  to
passing phenomena, from the illusion of names and forms.  This is the state of God-realization or
Self-realization.

After God-realization, the individual is completely merged in the Cosmic Consciousness
or God.  It is like the rivers entering into the ocean; they lose their identity and you can no more
distinguish  the  waters  of  the  Ganges  from  the  waters  of  the  Godavari.    The  appearance  of  the
world vanishes in the Reality of God, just as when the lamp is brought, the snake which appeared
to be vanishes in the rope that exists.

137.  How to free ourselves from Karma, Swamiji?

Feel, as you do your daily duties, that you are only a witness of all that goes on around
you, of even your own actions.  This is called Sakshi Bhav.  You should inwardly realize that you
are different from the active principle in you. This is the method of Vedanta.

There  is  the  other(cid:190)

easier,  but  equally  potent(cid:190) method  of  Nimitta  Bhav.    Feel  that  the
Lord  alone  is  the  real  doer  of  all  actions  and  that  you  are  an  instrument  in  His  hands.    Your
actions will be transformed into worship of the Lord, and you will not be bound to them.  Work
without expectation of any reward and without egoism.  Root out the idea of agency; feel, “I am
not  the  doer”.    You  will  be  freed  from  the  shackles  of  Karma.    You  will  not  accumulate  new
Karma. Allow your Prarabdha Karma to work out; and you will attain liberation.

138.  In our quest after Truth, Swamiji, I can understand that great Saviours like
Lord Jesus can help us.  But it is not always that such souls are present amidst us.  What
are we to do, Swamiji?

Saints are always present  in  the  world.    Rogues  are  also  always  present.    Saviours  and
dacoits  are  ever  present  in  the  world;  for,  it  is  a  world  of  dualities.    Good  and  evil  are  ever
present here.  Absolute good can be found only in God.  You should get the guidance of saints;
only they can teach you the Brahma Vidya.  Books will certainly help you; they will put you in
tune with the great ones.  When you read the Bible, you are in tune with Lord Jesus.  When you
read the Gita, you are in tune with Lord Krishna.  This also will help you.  But, just as you cannot
learn cooking from books, you cannot also learn Yoga from books alone.  But, you should not
indefinitely wait for a teacher to turn up; when the aspiration arises in your heart, you should at
once start the practice with the help of some scriptural text your mind likes the most, e.g., the
Bible.

52

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

139.  Are the senses meant to be starved and destroyed?  The ascetic ideal says so.
The  Greek  ideal,  however,  is  moderate  enjoyment  of  life.    Most  of  the  Western

thinkers of the rationalistic type accept this.

Modern psychologists assert that by denying or refusing the needs of the body such
as food and sex and suppressing emotions like attachment and love, people generally create
mental problems for themselves.  Is there any substance in this?

No; the senses have not been given only to be starved or killed.  Neither are they given for
being  indulged  in  and  fattened.    In  truth,  the  senses  are  not  given  for  any  earthly  purpose
whatsoever.  That is the highest view that the sages uphold for spiritual aspirants.  The senses are
given for being utilized consciously and deliberately for the attainment of something altogether
above  and  beyond  the  farthest  reach  of  the  senses.    To  understand  the  right  import  and
significance of self-restraint, one must take a more comprehensive view of the question.

In the human being, these senses are given together with the superior, directive faculty of
intelligence  with  its  aspects  such  as  discrimination,  selection,  etc.    The  senses  are  to  operate
under its wise supervision.  The aim is not the ultimate denial of the senses, but the achievement
through  restraint,  of  a  pleasure  a  million  fold  greater  than  that  achieved  through  gratification.
When one realizes this fact, he will understand, how, with the Yogic aspirant, this self-restraint is
not a matter of bitterness or reluctant, unwilling repression at all.  Understood in its correct light,
it is a joyous, voluntary discipline undertaken for the acquisition of an infinitely greater and more
blissful  experience.    Does  the  angler  ever  grudge  the  loss  of  the  worm  cast  for  catching  a  big
fish?

Moreover, the rationale of asceticism is not rightly understood by most people.  The ideal
of asceticism and penance is not based upon repression.  Conservation and sublimation are the
principles underlying asceticism rightly practiced.  The true ascetic withholds, diverts, canalizes
and finally transmutes his natural propensities.  The untoward repercussions of forced repression
such as complex, neurosis, etc., have no place here.  No doubt, modern psychologists are correct
in their view about repression, but one must know that it does not apply to religious asceticism,
wherein the process is sublimation and not just repression; and it must always be remembered
that asceticism is a part of Yoga which provides such a marvelous system of mental training and
culture that most effectively counteracts and wards off any possibility of neurotic complexes or
obsessions.

It  is,  however,  true  that  asceticism  is  very  much  misunderstood  by  the  majority  of
persons, and unfortunately by the ascetics themselves, as a result of which we hardly come across
a real ascetic in the aspirant world.

Yoga recommends a proper utilization of the tremendous faculties of undissipated senses
for higher purposes of inner culture, social welfare, inventions, scientific progress, and finally,
intuition.    The  senses  are  to  be  sublimated  through  restraint  applied  through  reason  and
intelligent judgement.  Their unlimited potentialities are to be harnessed for the greater good and
not  allowed  to  be  most  shamelessly  dissipated  for  a  momentary  pleasure,  unintelligent  and
animalistic.  Viewed from this angle, the aspirant is asked not to starve and destroy the senses,

53

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

but really to strengthen them and utilize them for his good.  Dissipation, on the contrary, actually
causes destruction of the senses.

The Greek ideal was enunciated as a general philosophy of life for the average humanity.
Asceticism, as understood by the sages, is a distinctive discipline specially incumbent upon that
class  which  would  walk  the  spiritual  way,  the  aspirant  class  dedicated  to  the  goal  of  Self-
realization.  This class is vividly aware that the conception of “moderate enjoyment of life” is a
conception alone and is well-nigh impossible to put into actual practice.  For, the very nature of
enjoyment  is  such  that  it  tends  to  progressively  increase  in  force  each  time  the  senses  are
indulged in.  The  habit  gets  man  in  its  grip  and  draws  him  down.    This  has  been  the  uniform
experience of the sages.  Therefore, at one stage or the other, a rigid religious self-control and
denial becomes imperative in the march to spiritual progress.

The rank materialist may not care for it, but the seeker does.  The seeker is marked out for
a  special  achievement.    You  know  how  an  ultra-modern  acrobat,  a  ballet  dancer  or  an  expert
boxer willingly imposes a rigid regimen upon himself to keep perfectly trim and healthy for his
professional success.  Mark the denials and restrictions during the training period of any serious
candidate trying for a championship in athletics!  His keen zest and enthusiasm serve to keep his
mind  in  a  high  mood  of  inspiration  and  anticipation.    What,  then,  should  be  the  interest  and
aspiration  in  true  asceticism  undertaken  as  a  part  of  the  training  for  an  infinitely  greater
achievement in the spiritual path?

140.  How to remove indigestion?

Eat  when  you  are  hungry.    Do  not  eat  anything  between  meals.    Eat  slowly  in  a  calm
mood.  Chew properly.  Eat moderately.  Avoid many combinations of food.  Drink a glass of
water one hour before or after food, never with a meal.  Fast on Ekadasi.  Eat nothing before 9
a.m. or after 7 p.m. Take care of your teeth.  Just before or after a meal, avoid all exertion, mental
or physical.  Relax at least for half an hour.  A long brisk walk is beneficial.  Paschimottanasan,
Halasan,  Bhujangasan,  Salabhasan,  Dhanurasan,  Mayurasan(cid:190)
these  Yogasans  will  remove
indigestion.    Depression  of  mind,  cares,  worries  and  anxieties  also  affect  the  stomach.    Be
cheerful.  Be regular in your Japa.

141.  What is the best method to check the advance of lust?

Lust is but a natural tendency of the mind.  The best method to check the impulse is the
way  of  intense  and  deep  Vairagya  by  a  study  of  religious  books,  by  constant  Satsang  with
Mahatmas  (noble  souls),  by  self-enquiry  or  “Who  am  I?”  enquiry,  by  close  observance  of  the
ways  of  the  world,  and  by  an  understanding  of  the  diseases  and  the  spiritual  degradation  that
result from over-indulgence.  Remember the saying of the Lord in the Gita:

Trividham Narakasyedam Dvaram Nasanmatmanah
Kamah Krodastata Lobhas Tasmat Etat Trayam Tyajet

(Ch.  XVI-21)

54

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Practice  the  chief  Asans  and  Pranayam  as  detailed  in  my  books  “Yoga  Asanas”  and
“Science of Pranayama”.  Do intense Japa to the point of self-forgetfulness.  Treat womankind as
the  manifestation  of  the  Devi,  the  adorable  Mother  Divine.    Maintain  Matru  Bhav  in  your
dealings with the other sex.  Give up looking at the face of a woman, but look at her feet to avoid
room for evil thoughts to crop up or indiscriminate deeds to arise.  Take cold water bath always.
Contro1 the tongue.  To give leniency to the tongue means to allow free access to lust to trouble
the  being.    Always  engage  yourself  in  pure  and  noble  thoughts.    Realize  the  glory  of
Brahmacharya by studying the lives of Hanuman, Ramdas, etc.  Check yourself as per the details
given  in  my  book,  “How  to  Get  Vairagya”.    Reduce  wants  and  desires.    In  proportion  to  the
reduction of the egoistic self, all negative tendencies will disappear.

142.  What view do you hold about cow-slaughter?  Do you believe that its practice

is the main cause of the downfall of our nation?

Scriptures, and the personages and episodes in the scriptures, are as true as God Himself.
The former definitely and unambiguously say and propound that all the thirty crores of Devatas
as envisaged in Hinduism have their abode in the frame of the cow, as in the Basil plant (Tulasi).
The cow is boldly proclaimed in the scriptures as one of the objects of Dana (offering) for the
uplift of the soul when the Prana departs from the body of a human being.   The  cow  is  really
worthy  of  our  adoration.    Pancha  Gavya  (the  milk,  curd,  Ghee,  urine  and  dung  of  a  cow)  are
ordained  to  be  taken  in  for  Prayaschitta  at  the  commencement  of  certain  Vratas  like  Rishi
Panchami.  Any number of instances can be cited regarding the holiness of a cow.  Go-puja (cow
worship) is as much fruitful as Sannyasi (Sadhu) Puja.  It is equal to, if not more than, Sakala
Devata  Puja  (worship  of  all  deities).    Such  being  the  case,  cow-slaughter  (Go-Vadha)  is
condemnable without hesitation.

143.  It is mentioned in our Puranas that in days of yore Akashvani was frequently
heard by our ancestors who were forewarned by it of coming events.  Is it credible?  Or,
was it only the voice of their own inner intuition?

There  is  some  order  in  the  four  Yugas.    The  consciousness  of  man  grows  grosser  and
grosser as time rolls by.  In the previous Yugas, man’s consciousness was subtler than it is in this
Yuga.

In the Satya Yuga, Bhagavan used to move amidst mankind.  Human consciousness was
not  far  removed  from  divine  consciousness.    In  the  Treta  Yuga,  man’s  consciousness  grew
grosser.    Though  God  was  not  constantly  moving  amidst  human  beings,  there  were  frequent
Avataras of the Lord.  In the Dvapara Yuga, man’s consciousness grew grosser still; and only the
immortal  Brahma-Rishis  like  Narada,  Visvamitra,  etc.,  used  to  move  amongst  men,  and  also,
Akashvanis used to warn people of coming events.

Now we feel that Akashvani is a very rare and miraculous thing; in the previous Yugas it
was not so.  Devas themselves used to move amongst men.  And Akashvani used to forewarn the
people  regularly.    Just  as  we  have  our  Government,  the  celestials  also  have  their  own

55

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Government.  Whenever they wished to communicate with mankind, they used to do so through
Akashvani.

Nowadays the deity communicates with the people mainly through dreams and visions.
That is practically the only form of communication with human beings that Devas have retained
in this Yuga.

144.    There  is  a  general  complaint  that  Swamiji  Maharaj,  who  is  supposed  to  be
above all caste, creed, religion and sex, is always surrounded by lady visitors, mostly.  Pray,
kindly answer this question.

I  do  not  prevent  men  from  sitting  around  me.    In  fact,  in  the  office,  there  are  quite  a
number  of  them  always  surrounding  me.    They  sit  on  the  bench  provided  for  visitors;  and  the
ladies,  naturally  in  keeping  with  Indian  tradition,  sit  on  the  ground,  around  my  table.    While
walking about, the European custom prevails; and  the  men,  of  their  own  accord,  let  the  ladies
first.  Therefore, the ladies seem to crowd round me and the men walk a few paces behind.

But,  when  all  is  said  and  done,  no  one  can  deny  that  women  have  more  devotion  than
men who have been endowed with more of intellect.  It is the ladies’ devotion that makes them
sit near my table in the office; and it is the men’s intellect that makes them question the propriety
thereof!  When the intellectual man cultivates devotion too, the result is an understanding heart
and breadth of vision that lead him soon to Self-realization.

I am as much interested in the spiritual welfare of women as in that of men; perhaps I take
a little more interest in guiding women on the path of Sadhana.  There are three reasons for this.
Firstly, you know the wise saying: “The hand that rocks the cradle rules the world”.  Woman is
the maker of man; if she is spiritual, then there is no doubt that the whole of mankind would be
pious and peaceful.  Secondly, while men all over the world are busy running after the shadow,
trying  to  acquire  wealth  and  the  useless  objects  of  this  world,  it  is  the  women  who  preserve
Dharma as best as they can.  They need all the spiritual strength and encouragement that we can
provide them.  Thirdly, as man’s “better half”, I know that if woman is spiritually inclined, she
will  not  leave  her  man  behind,  but  will  take  him  along  with  her  on  the  spiritual  path.    She  is
man’s ‘Sahadharmini’, and even if in the busy work-a-day world man forgets his role for a while,
woman will not; and she will be patiently working for his welfare and will convert him to the life
divine.

145.  Swamiji, while you always associate saintliness with humility, why are you so

fond of being photographed?

The  force  behind  the  system  of  visual  education  which  psychologists  today  acclaim  as
infinitely  superior  to  text-book  education  will  be  apparent  if  you  reflect  over  a  very  common
phenomenon.    Leave  on  your  table  in  the  study  a  few  good  books,  a  few  pictorials  and  a  few
photographs.  Let your children, your friends, come into the study.  What do they pick up first?
The books?  No. The photographs first, and then, the pictorials.

56

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

It  is  not  entirely  without  reason  that  the  old  women  in  South  India  prevented  their
grandchildren  from  being  photographed,  saying,  “Your  lustre  will  be  taken  away  by  the
photograph”.    It  is  true  that  your  lustre  is  transferred  to  the  photograph.    To  your  friends  and
relatives, to your near and dear ones, your photograph is alive, aglow with your lustre.  Therefore,
to a devotee, a picture of the Lord, and to a disciple, a picture of the Guru, is a Living Presence.
It is necessary for meditations.

Why  are  there  so  many  photographs,  you  may  ask.    Different  people  want  different
photographs,  in  different  poses,  with  different  backgrounds.    I  have  to  satisfy  all  of  them.    A
photograph  of  mine  taken  twenty  years  ago  may  look  more  youthful  and  may  be  better
technically than the photograph taken today; but the aspirant who has seen me for the first time
today insists that he should have a photograph of me as I am today and does not accept another
taken twenty years ago, however nice it may be.  And then, people want to be photographed with
me; these photographs act as mementos of their visits and inspire the visitors.

Refusing to be  photographed  is  subtle  egoism.    It  is  timidity  or  fear  of  criticism  in  the

garb of humility.  If you have right discrimination, you will at once understand.

146.  Why should a great saint like you, who has renounced everything, put on an

overcoat in winter?

A saint or a Sannyasin will not sleep on thorns, eat mud and stones, walk on his head and
break through walls.  His body, too, is subject to hunger and thirst, heat and cold, etc., and an
overcoat  is  only  a  vertical  blanket  in  bits  and  stitched  in  a  convenient  way  to  cover  the  body
against cold without hampering the movement of the limbs for service.  A blanket is a horizontal
piece.  I do not attach more importance or value to the coat.

After  all,  why  should  you  look  at  the  outer  garb?    Try  to  perceive  the  inner  man,  his
thoughts, his ideas and his virtues.  Not the external details.  Only a  real  saint  can  understand
another saint.

It is not a body besmeared with ashes, or a flowing beard or matted locks that determine a
saint.  Why should you attach much importance to this overcoat of mine?  To indulge in dress by
way of luxury is certainly not justified.  But, for bare necessities, the body must be provided with
proper dress and food.

147.  Why are you fond of publicity?  You talk of selfless service so much; and yet,

we find you working for name and fame!

Firstly, I am not working for name and fame.  When a person does selfless service, fame
comes to him, though he does not want it.  You found it so in the case of Mahatma Gandhiji’s
life  also.    Only  selfless  persons  know  how  to  utilize  even  that  fame  for  doing  more  selfless
service to a greater number of persons.

57

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Secondly,  it  is  through  publicity  that  I  come  into  contact  with  more  and  more  seekers
after  truth.    It  is  the  publicity  that  enables  more  and  more  people  to  offer  me  opportunities  to
serve them.  When people glorify  me,  they  glorify  only  Sannyasa,  they  glorify  a  divine  life  of
Sadhana: and if by bringing this to the notice of others, they too can be inspired to lead the divine
life, practice Sadhana for attaining Self-realization, I do not neglect it.  As you  know,  lives  of
great men remind you that you can make your life sublime.

Thirdly, the man who runs after name and fame would nor do menial service, would not
mix freely with everybody, would not cut jokes and make people laugh in his presence, he would
keep  himself  “far  above”  the  common  run  of  mankind,  compel  the  awe  and  reverence  of  tile
people, and by artificially dwelling on high philosophical themes alone during his conversations,
would endeavour to impress on those who meet him that he is far above all of them.  I like to mix
with all and to make everybody feel that I am one with all. 1 take intense delight in doing every
kind of service to everybody.  I am full of educative humour; even a young boy can cut jokes
with me.

Please come here and spend some time in the Ashram.  You will change your opinion.

148.  Can asceticism lead to enlightenment?

Asceticism is really the austere life of  sense-control  and  mental  concentration  lived  for
practices  or  spiritual  meditations.    True  asceticism  necessarily
the purpose of devotional
includes a strict observance of the moral and ethical disciplines, on the basis of which the higher
practices are undertaken.  Asceticism is a means to enlightenment in as much as it prepares the
ground for meditation which leads to wisdom and realization. Sometimes, asceticism is taken in
its narrower sense of bodily mortification alone.  But this is a grave error and this alone cannot
lead to enlightenment without the calming of the passions and discipline of the mind.

149.  Life and death(cid:190) which is more dreadful?

Life  and  death  are  both  processes  of  gaining  more  and  more  fresh  experiences  in  the
progress  of  evolution  tending  towards  the  fruition  of  the  wishes  of  the  experiencer.  Life  is  a
scene where the individual puts on the dress or the form of a certain amount of desires special
environment which can be fulfilled in the special  environment  afforded  by  it;  and  death  is  the
time when the individual goes behind the screen and puts on a new dress to appear in another
scene  of  life  in  order  to  fulfill  another  quality  of  desires  which  cannot  find  the  required
atmosphere  for  fruition  in  the  present  life,  but  demand  a  fresh  suitable  environment.    Hence,
when properly understood, neither of them is dreadful.  Both are necessary processes of breaking
barriers and tearing the veils in the path to Perfection.  To the ignorant man, however, both are
dreadful experiences.  He imagines death to be more dreadful.

150.  What is this earth?

Different  definitions  can  be  given  from  different  standpoints.    The  earth  is  one  of  the
fields  for  experiencing  the  fruits  of  good,  bad  and  mixed  actions,  and  for  performing  fresh

58

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

actions. It is a Bhoga-bhumi as well as a Karma-bhumi.  It is a bundle of atoms, a form of energy,
a  materialization  of  thought,  an  expression  of  the  effects  of  the  Karmas  of  the  individuals  of
whom it is composed and to whom it is related.  Scientifically, the earth is only one of the planets
which go to make the universe.

151.    In  an  Ashram  where  you  have  gathered  together  young  spiritual  aspirants,
promising to guide them in their rapid march to the Goal of life, viz., Self-realization, why
do you encourage dance, drama and music?

The  question  betrays  an  ignorance  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  music  and  dance.
They are divine.  I should request you to remember that Lord Krishna with His inseparable flute
and Mother Sarasvati with Her Veena remind you that music is divine.  Lord Nataraja reminds
you that dance had its origin in Him.  The wickedness of man would misuse anything.  Because
pickpockets are found in abundance in a temple on a festival day, should we deny ourselves the
blessings of His Darshan?

It is a pity that these two divine arts(cid:190) music and dance(cid:190)

have been brought down to the
level of sensuous entertainment.  It is the sacred duty of every lover of God and of the fine arts to
raise them to their original standards of purity and divinity.

Music  is  Nada  Yoga.    It  at  once  enables  you  to  attain  union  with  Nada  Brahman,  the

sacred Pranava.  Nritya or dance enables you to enter into Bhava Samadhi.

Drama is a very powerful instrument for the dissemination of spiritual knowledge.  What
you  cannot  teach  through  hundreds  of  books  and  hours  of  lecture,  you  can  bring  home  to  the
audience  easily  and  effectively  through  a  single  play.    Drama  is  an  art-form  that  touches  the
heart.

The very fact that the worldly man has taken such an interest in these three and misused
them to fulfil his nefarious purposes, shows what a tremendous power they have over the heart
and soul of man.  What a blessing they will be if they are used for spiritual ends!

152.  Why haven’t you engaged yourself in the active field of service to humanity,
Swamiji, just as Gandhiji had done?  Unlike him, you have secluded yourself on the banks
of the Ganges without entering the political field at all.

God has endowed each man with certain talents and marked out the field of service for
him.  Wisdom lies in finding out those talents and utilizing them in selfless service to humanity,
in  accordance  with  His  will.    Gandhiji’s  was  a  political  field  of  service.    Mine  is  the  field  of
renunciation,  Sannyas  and  Nivritti.    For  us  to  exchange  places  would  be  like  a  cobbler  and  a
tailor exchanging places!

But, do not allow the mind to form  the  impression  that  only  that  man  who  indulges  in

politics serves the Lord’s children...

59

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

153.  Why is suicide considered a sin?

Pleasure and pain in life are respectively the rewards of the good and the bad actions of
an individual.  If a man suffers, it is a reminder to him to ennoble his life and make his future
happy through the performance of good deeds, self-discipline and right effort.

When  a  person,  convicted  to  a  term  of  imprisonment  by  the  court  of  law  for  having
committed  an  offence,  escapes  from  the  prison,  the  law  demands  that  he  should  be  rearrested
and given added punishment, because he had not only committed an offence but tried to avoid
the punishment therefor.  So is the case with trying to escape from one’s suffering by inflicting
death on oneself, rather than attempting through self-effort to improve one’s future or accepting
philosophically what is beyond all help.

One has, besides, no right to take a life, even though it may be his own, since it is a crime
not only in the eyes of God but also in the eyes of social law.  The person who commits suicide
will suffer more in a spirit-body for a period of time, and then take a lower form of birth, to work
out his Karma.  So, one will not be benefited in any way by committing suicide.

154.  The Atman is different from the body and is not affected by the latter’s doings.
The body is reborn a number of times according to its Karma and goes through life and
death as per the Supreme Will.  If this is so, then who goes to hell or heaven?

The  real  experiencer  of  anything,  in  an  individualistic  way,  is  neither  the  Self  nor  the
physical body.  It is the mind that is the centre of individuality, that individualizes and imprisons
a ray of the Atman in what is called the individual soul.  And it is this mind, as embodied in the
subtle body, that undergoes the pleasure of heaven or the pains of hell,  or  for  that  matter,  any
experience through a gross or a subtle body.

The mind appears to have consciousness on account of there being a ray of the Atman in
it, in the form of a reflection, very much limited by its own constitution.  Hence it will be clear
that the individuality of a person is as much real or unreal as a reflection of a real object.

Though everything happens according to the Supreme Will, the Karma of the individual
determines the form or shape of the experience that is to be had under the dispensation of this
Will.  It is not the Atman or the body that has any type of relative experience, though the body is
a gross means of experience; it is the mind that has all this.

155.    We  see  a  very  good  man  suffering  too  much.    Why?  The  answer  may  be:
“Because of his previous Karma in his previous Janma”.  This we can trace back to the day
of creation.

The  law  of  Karma  is  inexorable.    Every  one  reaps  the  fruits  of  his  previous  births.    A
good man only will suffer a lot, because he is hurrying up in the spiritual march.  Many of his
evil Karmas have to be worked out and purged out quickly to hasten his salvation in this very
birth.  But, God gives him extraordinary power of endurance through His grace.  An aspirant or a

60

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

good  man  gets  many  difficulties  and  sufferings.    But  he  rejoices  even  in  sufferings  and
destitution  on  account  of  the  descent  of  the  Lord’s  grace.    He  voluntarily  welcomes  these
sufferings.  The only best thing in this world is  pain  or  suffering,  because  it  is  the  eye-opener
towards God.

156.  How to develop Bhakti?

By  Satsang,  by  repeating  the  Lord’s  Name,  doing  Kirtan,  hearing  Kathas,  reading  the
Ramayana, Bhagavata and the lives of Bhaktas(cid:190) Bhakta Vijayam and Bhakta Lilamrita(cid:190) Vishnu
Sahasranama, Narada Bhakti Sutras and Sandilya Sutras.  You must develop Vairagya.  This is
important.    Live  amidst  Bhaktas.    Live  in  Ayodhya.    Respect  Rama  Nama.    You  will  develop
Rama  Bhakti.    Live  in  Brindavan.    Study  Bhagavata.    Do  Japa  of  the  Dvadasakshara  Mantra,
“Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya”.  You will develop Krishna Bhakti.

157.    This  creation  is  the  result  of  Isvara’s  Eshana-Matra.    Nothing  less  than  or
beyond that Eshana can happen.  Isvara is not ordaining things all the time; else He would
be too busy.  This means determinism which leaves very little scope for individual effort.

The notion that Isvara ordains things only sometimes and not always and that He would
be too busy if He ordains things all the time is a puerile one.  Isvara can look to everything at one
stroke of His Being.  There is no such thing as His ‘being too busy’, for He is not like man, using
his senses for the purpose of acting.  Isvara does not act with a changing mind as man does, for
Isvara’s  action  is  inseparable  from  an  undivided,  ever-vigilant,  all-powerful,  all-pervading
Consciousness  which  neither  sleeps  nor  takes  rest.    Isvara  is  essentially  this  sovereign
Consciousness itself.  The whole universe is determined by Isvara’s creative Will.  But this is no
determinism  in  the  sense  of  a  denial  of  free  will  to  man.    Man  has  a  comparatively  clear
consciousness of himself and of others related to him outside, and he is possessed of the power of
discrimination and willing.  Isvara is the basis of cosmic activity as well as individual action, and
yet, He is not involved in the actions of the individual.  To Isvara, everything is determined.  The
past,  the  present  and  the  future  are  all  Isvara’s  Being  alone.    But  from  the  individual’s  own
limited standpoint, there is, in spite of the fact of a changeless universal law, a sort of apparent
freedom  of  action  imposed  upon  himself  by  his  own  individuality.    Though  the  individual’s
freedom of thought and action is not the final truth about it, it assumes a relative importance and
begins  to  affect  the  individual  with  its  reactions,  as  a  result  of  the  individual’s  notion  of  the
reality  of  a  limited  personality  and  its  thoughts  and  actions.    On  account  of  this  self-created
bondage  the  Jiva  suffers  and  this  suffering  comes  to  an  end  the  moment  the  Jiva  realizes  its
identity with Isvara in consciousness, in activity and in its very existence itself.

158.    Does  a  full-fledged  Yogi  not  feel  tempted  to  test  his  Yogic  powers?    Is  such

testing justified?

A full-fledged Yogi can never have the idea either to test himself or his powers.  If such
be the case, he should in no way be considered full-fledged or well-baked.  It is only the raw, the
ill-expanded and half-baked Sadhaks or Yogins that will have  the  inclination  to  test  their  own
selves, i.e., their progress, by virtue of the powers they might have acquired.

61

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Yogic powers cannot but manifest in proportion to the amount of progress one makes in
Yoga  as  per  the  injunctions  laid  down  in  the  Yoga  Sastras;  and  they  are  surely  a  detriment  to
one’s  further  progress  if  even  the  slightest  attention  is  paid  towards  them  either  to  advertise
oneself  or  to  test  oneself.    Every  day,  every  minute,  nay,  every  second,  will  see  some  blissful
experience  or  the  other  even  without  the  wish  of  the  Yogic  aspirant.    As  these  experiences
manifest of their own accord, the aspirant is to remain indifferent and unconcerned and wonder at
the glory of glorious God; and he should not care to have even a knowledge of the experiences.
Only then, and then alone, can he be expected to have onward progress.  A full-fledged Yogi is
he who has attained Self-realization through the medium of Yoga and so there can never be any
temptation  in  him  to  know  who  he  is  or  how  far  he  has  progressed  by  dint  of  the  powers
acquired.

159.  How does a person feel when he severs, all of a sudden, all relationships with

this mundane world for embracing Sannyas?

When  there  is  a  true  spirit  of  Tyaga  in  any,  there  can  never  be  any  idea  of  the  old
impressions  of  the  world  or  of  past  relations  with  mundane  existence.    Even  if  the  person
embraces Sannyas without the indispensable Vairagya, he need not necessarily feel for the loss
that he sustains, though the latent Vasanas, Vrittis and Samskaras still lie embedded in his mental
consciousness.    A  true  Sannyasi  enjoys  the  utmost  bliss  when  he  cuts  asunder  all  connections
with the world.

160.  I read your writings in “My Magazine”: “Woman is only a rotten leather bag
containing urine, pus, wool, blood, etc.” How can we condemn and deprecate womankind?
I think that there is nothing unholy in this universe.

Too  much  study  and  a  little  practice  bring  bewilderment.    To  induce  Vairagya  in  the
passionate  people,  I  place  such  a  negative  mental  picture  of  women.    Really,  women  are
manifestations of Sakti.  Yes, all is holy.  All is sacred.  All is beautiful.  This can be realized and
felt only by people advanced in the spiritual line.  Beginners can merely repeat these formulas
like  a  parrot.    Their  experience,  Drishti  and  mode  of  Sadhana  are  entirely  different  from  the
expressions of realized persons.  Beginners should be very careful, as they will be easily duped
by Maya.

161.  Politics has become the God of the day and is more so in India.  Religion has
come  to  be  regarded  as  a  superfluous  thing.    How  then  is  it  possible  to  make  everyone
believe in God and religion?

It is wrong to regard that politics has got some of those very people had fashioned those
precedence over religion.  In personal life, the majority of mankind does believe in God;  and in
India,  there  is  undercurrent  of  religion  throughout  the  land.    Politics  is  only  a  surface  activity
thrust upon most people due to socio-economic forces.

62

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

When  one  gets  knocks  and  blows,  when  he  gets  disgusted  with  the  sensual  objects  on
account of their impermanency, when he gets experience and discrimination and dispassion, his
mind will be turned towards God.  Now he becomes susceptible to religious influence; and the
company of good men and spiritual books make him religious.  Till then there is no use forcing
religion on this man.

162.  Does the soul take a new body in one year?  Does it take ten years?  How long

does one live upon the subtler planes before reappearing on the earth plane?

There is no definite period of time in this matter.  In main, two factors decide this issue,
viz., the nature of the individual Karma and the last impression before death.  It may vary from
hundreds  of  years  to  a  few  months  even.    Those  that  work  out  some  of  their  Karmas  in  other
planes in subtler regions take a considerable time before entering a fresh body.  The interval is
very long, for a year of the earth period passes off as a single day on the celestial plane.  There is
an instance cited where, seeing the amazement and admiration of foreign tourists at the imposing
ruins of certain ancient monuments, a saint present in the vicinity remarked that some of those
people had fashioned those monuments centuries ago.

A very sensual individual with strong craving or one with intense attachment sometimes
is reborn quickly.  Also in cases where life is cut short by a violent death or a sudden unexpected
accident, the Jiva resumes the thread very soon.  Usually, in such cases of immediate rebirth, the
Jiva often remembers many of the events of its previous life.  It recognizes its former relatives
and friends and identifies its old home and familiar objects.  This sometimes leads to very queer
developments.  There are some instances where a murdered person, being reborn, has declared
the manner of his death and revealed the identity of the killer in the recent past.

But  such  cases  of  immediate  rebirth  are  not  common.    Generally,  for  an  average
individual, the interval between death and rebirth happens to be a considerable period measured
in terms of earth time.  Persons who have done much good Karma spend a great deal of time on
the Daivic plane before being born again.  Great souls, spiritually advanced persons, wait for a
long time before reincarnating.

163.  What is music?  Has it got any power to soothe the aching mind?

Music is a system of harmonious, melodious and rhythmic sounds capable of producing
inner peace and an inexpressible thrill of joy.  Music is one of the sciences which deal with Nada
(Sabda) which is the first vibration of Brahman represented by the Pranava(cid:190) Om. All the Sapta
Svaras(cid:190) Sa,  Ri,  Ga,  Ma,  Pa,  Dha,  Ni(cid:190) which  evolved  themselves  later  into  the  various  vocal
sounds first originated out of this fundamental Om, symbolic of Brahman.  Music is one of the
fine arts or Lalita Kalas.  Yes.  It has got not only the power to soothe the aching mind, but also
the power to cure diseases like neurasthenia, insomnia, hysteria, moroseness, giddiness, etc.  To
achieve perfection in the Sangita Sastra is to attune oneself with Brahman.  As Brahman is Light
Absolute, Knowledge Absolute, Bliss Absolute and so on, so is He Nada Absolute.  God is Nada
Brahman.    One  can  achieve  God,  even  as  the  votaries  of  music,  Thyagaraja,  Purandhara  Das,
Tukaram and others, did.

63

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

164.  If God ordains all, it is impossible that I can kill or steal, unless He wishes to
punish my victim through me. The victim’s Karmas have fructified and it is necessary that
he  should  die,  etc.    If  he  does  not  get  killed,  the  whole  structure  of  this  creation  falls
through.  I am therefore brought in contact with the victim to carry out His behests.  An
executioner  is  paid  by  the  Government  for  doing  his  job.    Even  so,  why  should  I  not  be
rewarded for carrying out His will, rather than be punished for doing the Papa Karma?
Hitler could not have brought on war and killed so many persons.  It is idle to blame him.

God is all and He alone does everything; and yet, when man feels that he is the doer, he is
also  the  experiencer  of  the  rewards  and  punishments  consequent  upon  his  actions.    It  is  to  be
remembered that evil is possible only in the state of individuality or Jivahood or egoism and not
when one is God-realized, God-inspired or when one is an instrument in the hands of God.  The
Jiva cannot think that it is expected to kill a victim and that this is sanctioned by the Will of God,
for the Jiva is not omniscient and cannot know what exactly is the Will of God, unless it is raised
to the state of being in tune with God.  No Jiva should fall into the misconception that it is meant
to exhaust the Karmas of the victim by killing the victim.  This foolish act will react upon the
person who commits the action and the result will be intense suffering to the person responsible
for this deed.

God does not directly speak to any Jiva and say that it should kill or steal, and if the Jiva
falls into the error of committing these actions, it alone is responsible, and not God.  There is no
such thing as God’s directing an individual to perpetrate evil, commit murder or indulge in any
kind of violence or do anything which is against others’ well-being.  All such misdeeds are the
outcome  of  ignorance  and  delusion  and  one  who  does  these  is  punished  by  retributive  justice.
Divine activity is always a movement towards freedom, perfection, peace and bliss, and it will
not be in any way a cause of even the slightest suffering or pain.

165.  Can I have mental Shanti and can I feel the spiritual vibrations if I come to

Rishikesh?

Yes.  You can.  When you come here, come alone. If you come here with your company
of friends, you will create the same worldly atmosphere with all sorts of talks.  Come and have
the Darshan of Mahatmas.  Hear their spiritual instructions.  Live with them.  Observe Mouna
and practice concentration and meditation.  Then only will you enjoy peace.

166.  I am retired from service. I have fixed up my sons in service.  What should I do

now to lead the life of a Yogi?

Moha is very difficult to eradicate. It is a strong weapon of Maya. It is Moha that creates
the idea of mineness and the feeling of egoism. It creates infatuated love for children. You have
not  destroyed  Moha  in  your  heart  of  hearts.    Cut  off  all  connection  with  your  wife,  children,
friends and relatives.  Do not write letters.  Go in for a Yatra and visit the Mahatmas in the places
of  pilgrimage.    Develop  Vairagya.    You  have  found  out  from  your  own  experience  that  you
cannot get supreme peace and happiness in the worldly life.  If you really have no Moha and if

64

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

you have a strong desire to become a Sannyasin, then become a Sannyasin.  Lead a glorious life
of renunciation and attain Self-realization by the practice of Yoga.  From the experience of your
Yatra, select a Guru who will guide .you and follow his instructions implicitly.

167.  Can I take Sannyas when I have my wife and young children ? Is it not a sin to

avoid these dependents when they are in a helpless condition?

If you have intense and real Vairagya born of Titiksha and Viveka and if you      have
strong Mumukshutva, you can take Sannyas.  The Srutis declare:  “Renounce the world on the
very day you get Vairagya”.  If you have Moha for your wife and children, you cannot get any
spiritual progress, as your mind will be always thinking of them.  Therefore, destroy Moha first.
Possess real Vairagya.

When you are in the world, do a lot of Japa and meditation.  When you advance a bit, go
to a far-off place, live in seclusion, see the strength of your mind and see if you still have any
Moha lurking in your mind.  Then you can take Sannyas.  You will get success.

Before you renounce, see that your wife and children are well-provided.  Otherwise, they
will constantly be thinking of you and you will be drawn by their mental currents.  When you live
with your wife, teach her the importance of Sannyas and ask her to do Japa and meditation.  She
must lead a spiritual life.  Then only she will not interfere with you after your Sannyas.

Bhartrihari,  Gauranga,  Sadasiva  Brahman  and  others  deserted  their  wives.    After  their
Sannyasa, they did not think of their wives.  Did they not attain Self-realization?  Did any sin or
curse touch them?  Even if you do not provide for your family well, you can take Sannyas if you
have  real  Vairagya.    Just  isolate  yourself  from  your  family  and  see  whether  your  children  are
looked after or not.  Ram Tirth left his wife with two young children without providing anything.
But his elder son became an engineer and the other a professor.  Have perfect faith in God.

168.  The mind is fickle in me and the flesh is weak. Attempts at concentration are

sometimes successful, but often end in disappointment.  Kindly help me.

First of all, take care of your health.  Become strong by proper food and mild exercises of
Asan and Pranayam.  Observe Brahmacharya.  Then destroy desires, worries, anxieties, building
castles and vicious qualities.  Lead a contented life.  Reduce your Vyavahara.  Live in a spiritual
atmosphere like in Haridwar, Rishikesh, Uttarkashi, etc.  Observe Mouna for full three months.
You can easily control the mind.

169.    I  feel  a  burning  sensation  in  my  eyes  and  my  mind  is  restless;  and  so  I  am

unable to meditate.  Is there any effective remedy?

It is a sign to show that your system is heated.  Apply Amalaka oil or butter to the head
for fifteen minutes in the early morning and then take a bath.  Take Sattvic food.  Whenever you
feel thirsty, drink a cup of Misri Sharbat (water in which sugar-candy is dissolved).  Take a cup

65

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

of pure cow’s milk in the early morning and at night before going to bed.  Regulate your food.
Take bath twice a day.  That will cool the system.

170.  Whenever I try to concentrate on the Trikuti, I get a slight headache.  Is there

any remedy?

If concentration at the Trikuti produces headache, have Nasikagra Drishti, gazing at the
tip of the nose.  This will relieve you.  Do not struggle with your mind.  Take rest for half an
hour.  If you still feel the headache, close your eyes and then meditate.

171.  Can a man of my type at the age of 45 enter into the Hatha Yogic practices?

How can I get full vigour and vitality at this stage?

Yes.  You must have sincerity, earnestness, faith, vigour and vitality.  You must proceed
cautiously, step by step.  Over-exertion should be avoided.  The Yogic practices will give you
success if you observe Mouna, Mitahara and practice of Japa and meditation.  Success in Asan,
Pranayam,  etc.,  depends  upon  the  constitution.    There  are  different  exercises  to  suit  different
people.

If you want vigour and vitality, become a true Brahmachari from this very moment.  Be
established in mental and physical Brahmacharya.  Take Sattvic food.  Develop Vairagya.  Study
my  book  “Practice  of  Brahmacharya”.    You  will  find  practical  exercises  there  for  keeping  up
Brahmacharya.

172.  How can I find out if I have got Chitta Suddhi or not?

Sexual thoughts, worldly desires, unholy ideas, sexual Vasanas, anger, vanity, hypocrisy,
egoism,  greed,  jealousy,  etc.  will  not  arise  in  your  mind  if  you  have  Chitta  Suddhi.    You  will
have no attraction for sensual objects.  You will have sustained and lasting Vairagya.  Even in
dreams you will not entertain evil thoughts.  You will  possess  all  the  virtuous  divine  qualities
such as mercy, cosmic love, forgiveness, harmony and balance of mind.  These are the signs to
indicate that you have attained Chitta Suddhi.

173.  The Hindus worship the phallus or the sex organ. They are ignorant people.

They have no philosophy.

This  is  the  sarcastic  statement  of  a  curious,  passionate,  impure  foreigner  of  little
understanding  or  intelligence.    When  a  foreigner  tries  to  learn  the  Tamil  or  the  Hindustani
language, he first tries to pick up some vulgar words.  This is his curiosity nature.  Even so, the
curious foreigner tries to find out some defects in the worship of symbols.  The Linga is only the
outward symbol of the formless being, Lord Siva.

Linga means ‘mark’ in Sanskrit.  It is a symbol which points to an inference.  When you
see a big flood in a river, you infer that there must have been heavy rains the previous day.  When
you see smoke, you infer that there must be fire.  This vast world of countless forms is a Linga of

66

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

the omnipotent Lord.  The Siva Linga is a symbol of Lord Siva.  When you look at the Linga,
your mind is at once elevated and you begin to think of the Lord.

There is a mysterious power or indescribable Sakti in the Linga to induce concentration of
the mind.  Just as the mind is focussed easily in crystal gazing, so also, it attains one-pointedness
when it looks at the Lingam.  That is the reason why the ancient Rishis of India have prescribed
the Lingam for being installed in the temples of Lord Siva.

To  a  sincere  devotee,  the  Linga  is  not  a  block  of  stone.    It  is  all  radiant  Tejas  or
Chaitanya.    The  Linga  talks  to  him,  makes  him  shed  profuse  tears,  produces  horripilation  and
melting of the heart.  It raises the devotee above body-consciousness and helps him to commune
with  the  Lord  and  attain  Nirvikalpa  Samadhi.    Lord  Rama  worshipped  the  Siva  Linga  at
Rameswar.    Ravana,  the  learned  scholar,  worshipped  the  golden  Linga.    What  a  lot  of  mystic
Sakti there should be in the Linga!

The  light  of  consciousness  manifesting  out  of  Sadasiva  is,  in  reality,  the  Siva  Linga.
From Him all the moving and unmoving creations take their origin.  He is the Linga or cause of
everything.    In  Him  the  whole  world  merges  itself  finally.    The  Siva  Purana  says:  “Pitham
Ambamayam  Sarvam  Sivalingascha  Chinmayam”.    The  support  or  Pitham  of  all  is  Prakriti  or
Parvati;  and  the  Linga  is  Chinmaya  Purusha,  the  Effulgent  Light  which  is  self-luminous.    The
union of Prakriti and Purusha, of Parvati and Siva Linga, is the cause of the world.

The union of Linga with Yoni is a representation of the eternal union between the static
and  the  dynamic  aspects  of  the  Absolute  Reality.    This  represents  the  eternal  spiritual
communion of the paternal and the maternal principles from which all the phenomenal diversities
have originated.  This is an eternal communion of the changeless Being and the dynamic Power
or Sakti from which all changes flow.

The lower sexual propensities in the aspirants are eradicated by this sublime conception.
The  spiritualization  and  divinization  of  Linga  and  Yoni  help  the  aspirants  to  free  themselves
from  sexual  thoughts.    All  base  thoughts  gradually  vanish  by  entertaining  this  lofty  idea.    All
sexual  relations  in  this  world  are  spiritualized  as  the  manifestations  of  the  ultimate  Creative
Principle, of the eternal self-enjoyment and self-multiplication of Lord Siva in and through His
Power or Sakti.

174. What is the easiest way for concentration?

Japa  of  the  Name  of  the  Lord.    And  a  very  important  point  to  bear  in  mind  in  this
connection is that perfect concentration is not achieved in just a day; you should never despair
and give up your efforts. Be calm.  Be patient. Do not worry yourself if the mind wanders. Be
regular  in  your  Japa;  stick  to  the  meditation  hour.  Slowly  the  mind  will  automatically  turn
Godward.  And once it tastes the bliss of the Lord, nothing will be able to shake it.

175.  Why do we not remember our past lives?

67

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Such  remembrance  under  our  existing  limitations  would  considerably  complicate  our
present life.  Therefore, the wise and beneficent Lord has so ordered our mental evolution that we
cannot recall our past lives until such time as it is good and helpful for us to remember.  Such
instances may well form a cycle which is all clear to us when we come to the end of it, when we
see a whole rosary of lives threaded upon the one personality.

176.    It  has  been  said  against  reincarnation  that  there  are  more  people  now  in

comparison with the past world population.

It is not necessary that the same persons are reborn into this earth and none else.  In the
process of evolution into human life, many from lower births also come up to the human level.
All  these  are  controlled  by  superhuman  powers  or  by  the  Divinity,  God  or  Isvara  Himself.
Further, rebirth need not necessarily be on this earth plane alone.  It can take place anywhere in
the universe.

177.  I am observing fast on Ekadasi days.  I hear that fasting will cut short the life

of man.  Is it a fact?

Certainly not.  By fasting, the body, mind, Prana and nerves will be renovated, vivified.
All  the  impurities  will  be  destroyed.    One  can    develop  easily  Sattvic  qualities.    The  mind
becomes calm and peaceful.  All the diseases can be destroyed by fasting.  If a glutton takes to
fasting, he will find it difficult.  A man of Mitahara will take great pleasure in fasting.  He can
live for a longer period.  Constant fasts for long periods should be avoided.  Gradual practice is
necessary.  In the beginning, observe fast for  a day in a month.  Then, once in fifteen days.  After
some time, you can fast once a week.

178.    In  the  last  eight  years,  I  have  spent  my  days  in  studying  the  Vichar  Sagar,
Panchadasi, Gita, Upanishads, etc., and I have mastered them in a way.  But I do not feel
the oneness of life in all.  Are the scriptures for mere study alone?

Mere  study  of  the  Vichar  Sagar  or  Panchadasi  cannot  bring  in  the  experience  of  pure
Advaitic consciousness.  Vedantic gossiping and dry discussions on scriptures cannot help a man
in  feeling  the  unity  and  oneness  of  life.    You  should  destroy  ruthlessly  all  sorts  of  impurities,
hatred, jealousy, envy, idea of superiority and all barriers that separate man from man.  This can
be  done  by  incessant,  selfless  service  of  humanity  with  the  right  mental  attitude.    Practical
Vedanta  is  rare  in  these  days.    There  are  dry  discussions  and  meaningless  fights  over  the
nonessentials of religions.  People study a few books and pose as Jivanmuktas.  Even if there be
one real Jivanmukta, he will be a great dynamic force to guide the whole world.  He can change
the destiny of the world.  The present-day Jivanmuktas are mere bookworms.  Many imagine that
they can become Jivanmuktas by a little study of Laghu Siddhanta Kaumudi and Tarka.  Oneness
of life can be had only by Self-realization through constant spiritual practice.  Study of scriptures
can help you a bit, but it cannot make you a Jivanmukta.

68

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

179.  In spite of my thorough search, I am not in a position to find out a real Guru.

Can you suggest one?

To find out a real Guru who may sincerely look after the disciple is a very difficult task in
this  world.    It  is  quite  true.    But,  to  find  out  a  true  disciple  who  may  sincerely  follow  the
instructions of a Guru is indeed a very, very difficult task in this world.  Have you thought over
this point?  Do not use your reason too much in the selection of a Guru.  If you fail to get a Guru
of the first-class type, try to get one who is treading the spiritual path for some years, who has
right conduct and other virtuous qualities, and some knowledge of the scriptures.  Just as a Sub-
assistant Surgeon will be able to attend on a patient when the Civil Surgeon is not available, so
also,  the  second-class  type  of  Guru  will  be  of  great  help  to  you  in  the  absence  of  a  first-class
Guru.

180.  Is it absolutely necessary for a Sannyasin to wear coloured cloth?

The glory and liberty of a Sannyasin can hardly be imagined by the householders.  If there
is a change inside the mind, there must be a change outside also.  Wearing the ochre-coloured
cloth, the orange robe, is very necessary for one who has a changed mind.  Due to the force of
Maya  or  habit,  when  the  senses  go  to  the  objects  of  enjoyment,  the  moment  you  look  at  the
coloured cloth you wear, it will remind you that you are a Sannyasin. It will give you a kick and
save you from vicious actions.  It has got its own glory and advantages.  A real Sannyasin only
can cut off all connections and ties and completely get rid of Moha.  His friends and relatives will
not trouble him.  The robe is of great service when one appears on the platform for preaching.  It
has got its own sanctity in the minds of Hindus.  The common people will receive the ideas more
readily from Sannyasins.

181.  In  your  book  “Easy  Steps  to  Yoga”,  you  speak  about  the  importance  of
Brahmacharya. I get tired after the day’s hard labour; is it a sin to look at my wife who
gives  me  pleasure?    Does  Brahmacharya  help  one  escape  old  age?    The  sexual  act  is
necessary for renewing life. All man’s mental powers give him no chance of escaping the
time-linked process of birth, life, aging and death. For the propagation of the species, man
and woman have been provided with this creative power; and the sex act is a necessity.

You have viewed the topic from a thoroughly wrong angle.  The very premise for your
theory is wrong.  Immortality does not pertain to the physical body.  Once born, a man has to die,
i.e., cast off the physical body.  That state in which you freely enjoy the continuity of life without
entering  the  cycle  of  birth  and  death  is  immortality.    Unless  you  identity  yourself  with  that
Cosmic Self which transcends all limitations of space and time, you cannot enjoy immortality.
To identify and realize that Immortal Self, you should conserve and preserve every bit of energy
within you.  There is only one energy within us which is able to do the different functions under
various forms.  As you expect a long life to the machines you use by keeping them in a  good
condition  and  doing  the  minimum  work  without  allowing  them  either  to  rust  or  to  waste,  you
should maintain this body well-conditioned and have its life prolonged by conserving the energy
within.  Without the body, how can you probe into the higher planes?

69

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Please  go  through  my  translation  of  the  Srimad  Bhagavad  Gita.    Practice  the  sort  of
renunciation advocated by it.  It does not require you to renounce family life.  You have to live in
the  world  and  learn  through  the  world  without  becoming  one  of  the  world.    Your  duty  is  to
maintain  the  household,  but  not  to  get  attached  to  it.    Then  and  then  alone  will  you  have  that
purity  of  mind  which  will  enable  you  to  progress  on  your  path  towards  the  attainment  of
perennial peace, joy and bliss.

Enough  of  your  wrong  notions.    Awake  and  understand  your  true  imperishable  nature.
Behold your true immortal, all-pervading Self and rest in it drinking the nectar of immortality.
Follow  my  instructions.    You  will  be  a  thoroughly  changed  personality  with  inner  spiritual
strength.  Have faith and sincerity.  Success is yours.  Thou art That.

182.  Is it absolutely necessary to do Nishkama Karma Yoga for Self-realization?  If

so, how should it be done?

Yes.  You cannot understand and realize the spirit and object of Vedanta if you neglect to
practice  Nishkama  Karma  Yoga  for  the  eradication  of  the  impurities  in  the  mind.  Nishkama
Karma Yoga gives you Chitta Suddhi and eventually culminates in the realization of the unity of
the Self.

Serve  everyone  with  intense  love,  without  the  idea  of  agency,  without  expectation  of
fruits, reward or appreciation.  Feel that you are only a Nimitta or an instrument in the hands of
God.  Worship God in the poor and the sick.  Have no attachment to any place, person or thing.
Keep  up  mental  poise  amidst  the  changes  of  the  world  without  consideration  of  success  or
failure, gain or loss, pleasure and pain.  Have the mind always rooted in the Self amidst activities.
Then you will become a true Karma Yogi.  Work elevates, when done in the right spirit.  Even if
people scoff at you, beat and kill you, be indifferent.  Continue your Sadhana.

183.  The mistakes and sins in my life are countless and the limit of my ignorance is
infinite.    I  have  not  learnt  Sanskrit.    Kindly  let  me  know  if  I  can  tread  the  path  of
spirituality.

Ignorance is a mental Kalpana, imagination.  Thou art an embodiment of wisdom.  When
the  veil  drops,  you  will  shine  in  your  own  Svarupa.    Allow  the  Vasanas  and  egoism  to  pass.
Break the clouds.  Behind the clouds, there is the luminous sun.  Behind the mind, there is the
self-radiant Atman.  Purify yourself.  Destroy the evil Vrittis.  Plod on in the spiritual path.  You
have taken this life for this purpose only.  For Self-realization and the spiritual path, Sanskrit is
not at all necessary.  You will have to understand the theory and essence only.  All the Sanskrit
books are tendered into English and other  languages.    Be  not  troubled  on  this  score.    Sanskrit
may help you a bit.  That is all.  If you find time. you can learn the alphabets so that you can read
some Stotras, Gita Slokas and the Upanishads.

184.  Should it not be considered as Himsa when we cut vegetables and fruits?

70

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Cutting  vegetables  is  not  Himsa.    There  is  no  real  consciousness  in  plants  and  trees,
although there is life in them.  There is life in plants, sensation in animals, mentality in human
beings  and  spirituality  in  sages.    There  is  no  Visesha  Ahankara  and  reflection  of  Chaitanya  in
plants and trees.  Hence they cannot experience pain.  The tree will not say, “I am experiencing
pain”.    The  mind  in  plants  and  trees  is  not  developed.  It  is  quite  rudimentary.    It  is  Jada  and
insentient.  Life on earth will be impossible if we take cutting vegetables also as Himsa.  This is
only splitting the hairs.  This is the idle philosophy of those who take interest in vain discussions
and arguments.  Ignore trifles.  Become a practical man.

185.  Why does God not speak to me?  What is the obstacle?

The  self-surrender  is  not  complete.    There  are  still  subtle  Moha,  subtle  desires  and
egoism.  The Indriyas are still powerful and outgoing.  These are the obstacles.  When these are
removed, you can hear the shrill, sweet, inner voice of God.  Impure souls mistake the voice of
the impure mind for the voice of God.

186.  I am disgusted with the false world.  I know fully well that it is no use living in
such  a  world.    Everywhere  I  find  misery  alone.    I  intend  to  enter  into  the  life  of  a
Sannyasin, but I do not know where to find out a Guru. Kindly let me know what I have to
do to become a Sannyasin.

You  should  not  hate  the  world,  but  you  should  hate  the  worldly  life.    The  world  is  a
manifestation of the Lord.  The world is the best teacher for you.  The world cannot stand in the
way  of  your  attainment  of  Kaivalya.    You  must  change  the  way  of  your  living  and  viewing
things.  You will have to build a new mind and a new vision.    Then  the  world  will  appear  as
heaven.  You have not developed real Vairagya.  It is a kind of temporary aversion on account of
some  mishap.    You  are  unfit  for  taking  Sannyas.    You  may  fail  to  carry  out  the  duties  of  a
Sannyasin.  You must ascend the spiritual ladder step by step.

I will advise you to remain in the world and do Nishkama Karma Yoga for some years to
purify the heart (Chitta Suddhi).  You must develop humility, the spirit of self-sacrifice, Kshama,
mercy, Visva-prem.  These virtues can be acquired by selfless service alone.  You must have the
qualifications  Sama  (peaceful  nature),  Dama  (self-restraint),  Sarva-sanga-parityaga  (freedom
from all sorts of attachments), and perfect obedience to and implicit faith in the teacher before
you approach a Guru for taking Sannyas.  Otherwise you will not be benefited.

187.  When I know that this world is not real and I am bound to leave it one day or
the other, why should I not renounce it now?  Taking Pati Seva as my duty, I am doing it
very sincerely and faithfully.  But I know that neither Pati nor son nor father nor mother
can  help  me  in  achieving  the  real  goal.    Did  not  Mira  meet  Bhagavan  by  leaving  her
husband?

For a lady, her husband is the image of God.  She will have to realize God in and through
him  alone.    She  need  not  go  to  temples  even  for  worship.    Your  Vairagya  is  a  momentary
bubbling.  It cannot help you in any way in your spiritual progress.  You may say, “This world is

71

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

unreal”; but in your heart of hearts you may be attached to several objects.  The Vairagya that
comes temporarily out of family difficulties and troubles is like a flash of lightning.  It will pass
away in no time.

In what sense is the world unreal?  The world is not as unreal as the horn of a hare or the
son of a barren woman.  This world is an empirical or relative reality (Vyavaharic Satta).  It is not
so real as Brahman.  When compared with Brahman or the Eternal, it has no real existence.  The
world is a phenomenon or an appearance.  Brahman is the noumenon or the absolute.  The world
is unreal only for a Jnani who is resting in his own Svarupa.  The vast majority of persons have
misunderstood  the  term  ‘Mithya’.    Hence  they  try  to  leave  the  world  aimlessly  without  any
discipline and without developing any virtue.  This is a sad mistake.  Taking the world as a mere
appearance, you will have to work in the world with untiring patience without egoism, but with
Atma  Bhav  and  with  a  clear  understanding  of  the  noumenon  or  the  basis  of  the  world.  If  the
aspirant leaves the world without purification of the heart through Nishkama Karma Yoga and
without  possessing  the  four  means  of  salvation,  he  will  not  be  benefited  in  the  least  by  his
renunciation.

The case of Mira is quite different.  She was a Yoga-Brashta with full Vairagya, with a
heart saturated with Krishna-prem from her very childhood.  Your case is different.  Do not draw
a  comparison  here.    You  will  have  to  evolve  through  serving  your  husband  and  humanity.
Practice this.  See the Lord Krishna in the sparkling eyes of your husband and in all faces.  May
God bless you!

188.  I have no desire to leave Grihastha life at this moment and yet I am very, very

keen to awaken the Kundalini Sakti.  Is this possible?  Will Your Holiness help me?

Yes, you can stick to Grihastha Ashrama.  But live as an ideal householder.  Support the
other three Ashramas.  If the duties of a householder are strictly followed, there is no necessity
for Sannyas.

Become a true Brahmachari and give up sexual intercourse completely.  You have enough
children.    The  practice  of  Yoga  strictly  demands  this  from  you  if  you  desire  to  make  real,
substantial, rapid spiritual progress.  Train your wife also in the spiritual path.  Let her also repeat
the same Mantra you are repeating and study religious books and observe occasional fasts or live
on milk and fruits.

You  can  continue  Sirshasan  as  usual.    Observe  strictly  the  rules  of  right  conduct.    Be
established in the practice of Yama and Niyama.  Purify your heart first before you awaken the
Kundalini.  Remove completely jealousy, selfishness, anger, lust, Moha, pride, Raga and Dvesha.
Then  Kundalini  can  be  easily  awakened.    Yes.    It  is  quite  possible  for  you  to  awaken  the
Kundalini.  I shall help you in its awakening.  Don’t worry.  Increase your Japa and meditation.
You  can  achieve  spiritual  success  by  remaining  as  a  Grihastha,  but  you  must  be  a  true
Brahmachari in thought, word and deed.

72

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

189.  Your Holiness advises a man to treat his wife as “World Mother” as soon as a
son is born to him.  In case the son dies after a few months, there will be no heir left to look
after his estate.  Under such circumstances, what should he do?  Kindly let me have your
advice.

Why  should  you  bother  about  heir  for  the  estate?    Did  you  bring  the  estate  with  you?
Would you take it also when you die?  What is estate?  Is it not a lump of earth only?  Can this
estate and heir give you happiness and peace?  Are they not sources of misery and worry?  The
desires  for  property  and  children  will  bind  a  man  to  the  wheel  of  Samsara.    These  are  all
hindrances for a Jijnasu.

What did Lord Buddha and Bhartrihari do with their estates?  Did each one crave for a
son to look after his estate?  How can a man who thinks of property and son think of God?  It is
impossible to think of God and Mammon.  In the presence of light, darkness cannot exist.  When
you enjoy sensual pleasure, you cannot have the bliss of Atma.

If you beget another child, you will multiply your miseries.  You have already many ties
around your neck.  He who has rightly understood the magnitude of human sufferings will never
bring forth a child into the world.  If your mind is full of Vasanas and if you find it difficult to
curb the passions, you can have a second son.  Then become a true Brahmachari.

190.    God  is  all-pervading  formless  Being.    How  can  He  be  confined  to  an  idol?

What is the use of idol worship?

The divinity of the all-pervading God is vibrant in every atom of creation.  There is not a

speck of space where He is not.  Why do you then say that He is not the idols?

The idol is a support for the neophyte.  It is a prop of his spiritual childhood.  A form or
image is necessary for worship in the beginning.  It is not possible for all to fix the mind on the
Absolute  or  the  Infinite.    A  concrete  form  is  necessary  for  the  vast  majority  for  practicing
concentration.

Idols are not the idle fancies of sculptors, but shining channels through which the heart of
the devotee flows towards God.  Though the image is worshipped, the devotee feels the presence
of the Lord in it and pours out his devotion unto it.  The idol remains an idol, but the worship
goes to the Lord.

To a devotee, the image is a mass of Chaitanya or consciousness.  He draws inspiration
from the image.  The image guides him.  It talks to him.  It assumes human form to help him in a
variety of ways.  The image of Lord Siva in the temple at Madurai in South India helped the fuel-
cutter and the old woman.  The image in the temple at Tirupati assumed human form and gave
witness in the court to help His devotees.  There are marvels and mysteries.  Only the devotees
understand these.

73

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Idol worship is not peculiar to Hinduism.  The Christians worship the Cross.  They have
the image of the Cross in their mind.  The Mohammedans keep the image  of  the  Kaaba  stone
when they kneel and do prayers.  The mental image also is a form of idol.  The difference is not
one in kind, but only one of degree.

All worshippers, however intellectual they may be, generate a form in the mind and make
the mind dwell on that image.  Everyone is an idol worshipper.  Pictures and drawings are only a
form of Pratima.  A gross mind needs a concrete symbol as a prop or Alambana; a subtle mind
requires an abstract symbol.  Even a Vedantin has the symbol OM for fixing the wandering mind.
It is not only pictures or images in stone  and  wood  that  are  idols.    Dialectics  and  leaders  also
become idols.  So, why condemn idolatry?

191.    Is  woman  made  for  man  and  to  serve  him  only?    Did  God  create  us  for  the
kitchen and for procreation? Why should a woman play a secondary part?  Why do you
deny equal rights to women?

Woman  is  in  no  way  inferior  to  man.    The  home  is  a  cooperative  organization.  It
flourishes on the principle of division of labour.  If a man earns and the wife stays at home, it
does not mean that the woman is a parasite and a slave.  She is indeed the builder of the nation.
To make noble citizens by training their children and to form the character of the whole human
race is undoubtedly a power far greater than that which women could hope to exercise as voters
or law-makers, as presidents, ministers or judges.

The  idea  that  men  and  women  are  equals  is  purely  a  Western  concept.    The  Indian  or
Hindu concept is that man and woman, Purusha and Sakti, are one and indivisible.  Sita did not
think herself as a separate entity.  She was in and of Rama.  The Indian woman always identifies
herself completely with her husband in all domestic, religious and social life.  She is the queen of
the house.  She illumines the home through the glory of motherhood.  It is in the motherhood of
woman that all her prerogative, glory, competency and jurisdiction are specially vested.

The West has seen women playing the man in every walk of life.  But I ask: “Has this
contributed more to human happiness and to the real prosperity and peace of the country?  Surely
it  has  brought  more  divorce  courts,  more  unhappiness,  more  restlessness.    This  has  only
thickened the women’s veil of ignorance and augmented their Rajasic element”.

Even  in  the  West,  there  are  many  persons  who  are  not  in  favour  of  women  claiming
equality with men.  Even those who were in favour of this movement are now seriously repenting
for  their  wrong  advocacy,  because  they  are  actually  witnessing  before  their  eyes  its  pernicious
effects.

Loose life is not perfect freedom.  Promiscuous mixing is not freedom.  Some women of

India have ruined themselves by taking advantage of this false freedom.

74

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

The ideal of the woman in the West should not be our ideal, for then we shall not only be
denaturalized, but also denationalized.  One nation cannot adopt the ideal and the social customs
of another without undermining one’s own rock-bottom base.

Women  should  become  good  mothers  only.    This  is  the  function  they  will  have  to
perform in the grand plan of God.  This is what is meant in the divine plan.  This is the will of
God.  Women have their own psychological traits, temperament, capacities, virtues, instincts and
impulses.  They have their own disadvantages in society.  They cannot, and should not, compete
with men.

192.  Is married life not an obstruction to God-realization?  How can a married man

please both his wife and God simultaneously?

Married life can never be an obstruction to those who are endowed with dispassion and
detachment to worldly objects and who consider that life is intended to mould one’s own self by
drawing  lessons  from  the  university  of  Nature.    Study  the  lives  of  saints  like  Thyagaraja,
Ekanath,  Narsi  Mehta,  Bhadrachalam  Ramdas,  Tukaram,  Namdev,  Jayadeva,  Chaitanya  and
Kabir.  Probe deep into the world and the way in which the above-mentioned saints and a host of
others actually led their lives.

It is disgraceful on the part of man if he tries to please himself by pleasing his wife.  He
who considers married life as intended to please his wife is worse than an abject slave.  Be self-
restrained.  Let the wife be made aware of the aim and purpose of life and the ways and means of
attaining it in and through Grihastha life.  Do not yield to the lower impulses when prompted by
your incorrigible nature or by the stubborn character of the other party, but arrange yourself in
such  a  balanced  way  that  the  psychic  and  physical  personality  of  neither  is  upset.    Whatever
actions you do, dedicate them to God and consider them not as yours.  Pray for a self-purifying,
contented and continent life.  Resign yourself recklessly in the spiritual battlefield and make no
retreat  even  if  life  happens  to  be  at  stake.    Be  a  master  over  yourself  and  treat  yourself  as  a
servant  of  God,  but  not  as  a  servant  of  your  wife.    Feign  that  you  are  one  with  your  wedded
partner, but be ever transcending in mental outlook.  You can be on the safe side of life.

193.  Shall I do Japa of “Om Narayana” instead of “Om” in order to make it both
Nirguna  and  Saguna?  Japa  of  the  Narayana  Mantra  keeps  the  Chaturbhuj  Murti  of  the
Lord before my mental eyes. I, however, have been accustomed to meditate on the Murti of
Lord Krishna and am in search of a Chaturbhuj Murti of Lord Krishna with Arjun at His
feet.  Please let me know how I should go on in future.

You have already created a clear mental image, momentum and force by meditating on
Lord Krishna.  It is not good to change the form now.  Even if you change it, the old form will
come before the mind through force of habit.  Therefore, have the same image only.  Do not go in
for Lord Krishna with four hands.

Om Narayana is not the proper Mantra.  The proper Mantra is Om Namo Narayanaya.

75

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Om is both Saguna and Nirguna.  If you study Prasnopanishad, you will understand this

point well.

If  at  all  you  wish  to  change  the  Mantra,  you  can  revert  to  Om  Namo  Bhagavate

Vasudevaya.  You can repeat this for some time.

194.  I have been reading the Upanishads and other scriptures and I find one and
the same thing in all of them.  They say that everything we come across is unreal, only God
is real and that we have to think and understand the Truth by ourselves.  How are we to do
it, Swamiji?

Reading  will  help  you  only  to  a  certain  extent.    Too  much  reading  will  land  you  in
confusion.    You  should  meditate  and  concentrate  on  one  particular  idea.    That  particular  idea
should serve as the eye-opener.  Then alone will you get Vairagya; you will be able to understand
the  false  nature  of  things.    Take,  for  instance,  the  life  of  Sri  Swami  Sadasiva  Brahmendra  of
Nerur.  The mere uttering of the word ‘wait’ by his mother, when he asked her to serve  food,
inflicted such a blow on his mind and stirred it so well as to make him understand the Reality.

You may be convinced intellectually that the world is false, only God is real and all the
sense-enjoyments bring misery only.  But this conviction is not strong.  You may think, “Let me
enjoy  the  sense-pleasures  for  five  minutes”.    Thus  you  are  deceived  by  Maya.    All  sense-
pleasures are sugar-coated pills made by Maya.

You  must  reflect  on  such  Slokas  as  “Ye  Hi  Samsparsaja  Bhoga  Duhkha  Yonaya  Eva
Te...”. You should identify with the Higher Self which is infinity, eternity, immortality.  Always
think, “Suddhoham, Shantoham, Satchidanandoham”.  You will be elevated.

Abhyasa and Vairagya are necessary.  Tyaga and Tapas will give you tremendous powers.
Be not cheated by the temporary pleasures of the world(cid:190)
car, property etc.  Be not unnecessarily
worried by undue attachment etc.  Do your duty and leave the rest to Him.  He will take care of
you.

195.  Is not a realized soul selfish as he has sought his emancipation only?  Also, if

all renounce, what will be the result?

The question is based on a wrong hypothesis.  If all the women are barren, if all turn out
to  be  doctors  or  lawyers  or  dacoits,  what  would  become  of  the  world?    Only  a  few  with  an
accumulated wealth of spiritual Samskaras can have Vairagya and renunciation.

The  saint  purifies  the  whole  world.    He  is  not  selfish.    Sankara,  Ramanuja  and  others
worked  for  the  entire  mankind.    Even  he  who  lives  in  seclusion  or  leads  an  ‘Incognito’  life,
influences  the  world  with  his  thought-currents.    Even  a  novice  in  the  spiritual  path  does  great
good to the world by his pure thoughts.  These things, the ways and actions of saints and saintly
people, cannot be understood by an impure mind.

76

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

196.    Observance  of  Brahmacharya  would  appear  to  be  meaningless,  because
scientists, through laboratory tests, have proved that semen cannot be reabsorbed into the
system and that the brain has nothing to do with semen.

Semen is a mysterious secretion that is able to create a living body.  Semen itself is living
substance.  It is life itself.  Therefore, when it leaves man, it takes a portion of his own life.  A
living  thing  cannot  be  put  to  laboratory  tests,  without  first  killing  it.    The  scientist  has  no
apparatus to test it.  God has provided the only test to prove its precious nature, viz., the womb.
The very fact that semen is able to create life is proof enough that it is life itself.

I have thousands of letters from young men who have wasted this precious fluid and are
in a miserable plight.  Several young men even go to the point of committing suicide!  Through
reckless waste of semen, they lose all their physical, mental and intellectual faculties.  Those who
are  perfect  Brahmacharins  have  lustrous  eyes,  a  healthy  body  and  mind,  and  a  keen,  piercing
intellect.

Scientists with their test tubes and balances cannot approach subtle things.  No amount of
dissection of the body will be able to tell you where the soul is, where life is, or where the mind
is.    Through  the  practice  of  Yoga,  the  seminal  energy(cid:190)
flows
upwards  and  enriches  the  mind.    This  has  been  declared  by  the  sages.    You  will  have  to
experience it yourself.

not  the  gross  physical  semen(cid:190)

197.  Is suicide the logical conclusion for a man who has come to believe that life has

no meaning for him?

Suicide  is  not  the  logical  conclusion  of  a  meaningless  life,  but  the  illogical  conclusion
arrived  at  by  the  thoughtless  and  non-discriminating  mind  which  has  failed  to  perceive  the
meaning that is in life.  Suicide does not remove misery or correct defects, but leads to violent
reactions  later  on.    And  the  reactions  will  be  more  painful  than  the  present  condition  of
dissatisfactory life.  Suicide is pure defeatism.

198.  If escape from this world be the goal, where is the incentive for social work?

Escape from the world is not the goal, but freedom from worldliness is what is desired.
Social work has got its own valuable part in life until a certain stage, though after a time it is
transcended by a higher consciousness.  The value of social work, however, is purely subjective.
It is not that one makes himself a great reformer or a saviour of mankind, but that he offers his
ego as a sacrifice at the altar of universal love and so obtains purity of mind, which is the basis of
all spiritual progress.  For a realized soul, however, it is an urge born out of compassion for his
fellow-beings.

199.    What  are  the  methods  to  develop  unruffled  serenity  and  mental  composure

under all conditions of life ? Is absolute serenity possible of attainment?

77

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Yes.  By all means.  Consider yourself as dead to the world or the world as dead to you.
Develop Atma Vichar Sakti.  Identify not with the mind, senses and intellect or with any of the
other  modifications  of  the  mind.    Always  be  engaging  yourself  in  the  thought  of  the  Divine.
Have no thought of yourself or the surrounding world.  Be absolutely indifferent to yourself, as
you  ought  to  be  towards  the  surroundings,  the  various  daily  happenings  and  the  worldly
repercussions.    Knowledge  of  the  Self,  when  once  attained,  absolves  one  of  all  mental
disruptions and psychic derangements.  Where there is firm-grounded knowledge of the Self in
the spiritual seeker, where there is the consciousness in him that “all indeed is Brahman, Sarvam
Khalvidam  Brahma”  and  that  he  is  none  other  than  that  Supreme  Brahman,  and  where  he
understands that all happenings(cid:190)
are but passing phases on the screen of
the world, there can never be any ill-balanced mental life.

good, bad or mixed(cid:190)

It is the mind that is the sole cause for bondage or Moksha.  The mind is the substratum
behind pleasure or pain, happiness or misery, success or defeat.  Rise above the pairs of opposites
by resorting to a Guru and his instructions.  Study the lives of saints who underwent various trials
and  the  books  by  realized  souls.    Develop  the  spirit  of  true  surrender  wherein  you  have  no
thought of body or bodily needs or self-protection even in the slightest degree and wherein you
forget  the  idea  of  life  and  death  altogether.    Serenity  is  merely  mental.    Therefore,  cultivate
mental equipoise by gaining spiritual knowledge.

200.  Why is Ganges water regarded so sacred?  What are the scientific or religious

reasons for its water being eternally free from any sort of contamination?

Is it a fact that all sins are washed away by a dip in the Ganges?

From time immemorial, Mother Ganges has been associated with sages and saints who

had found immense spiritual benefit by bathing in her waters as well as by drinking it.

Fire  can  burn  all  other  things,  but  cannot  act  upon  its  own  self.    Flowing  down  the
Himalayan ranges which contain many a rare herb that possess disinfectant power to a very high
degree,  Mother  Ganges  contains  the  various  chemicals  (found  in  those  herbs)  in  a  nascent
condition.  As such other pollutants lose their powers to defile the Ganges when thrown into her
waters.  All our religious dogmas are based on sound scientific reason.

Yes, all sins are washed away by a dip in the Ganges when there is a real Bhav in your

mind that you are atoning for your wrong doings.

201.    Don’t  you  believe  that  Naga  Sadhus,  when  moving  in  public,  are  a  standing
menace to our holy culture?  Have they really risen to that level as to regard this nakedness
as nothing indecent and bad?  Is there any spiritual significance to this nakedness of body
in its totality?  Kindly illumine.

Our  holy  culture  is  essentially  spiritual  in  every  respect.    Only  when  the  Spirit  is
forgotten,  dualities  like  decency  and  indecency  arise.    All  these  dualities  exist  for  the  worldly
man  and  not  for  him  who  tries  to  go  beyond  them  and  establish  himself  in  that  non-dual,

78

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

differenceless state.  From the spiritual viewpoint, how can you then come down to the level of
finding the existence of dualities and getting affected by them?

The spiritual significance of remaining naked lies in its being a helpful factor in getting
over the body-consciousness or Sarira Abhimana.  The man whose mind is tainted with worldly
thoughts and who is awake to the dualities will feel ashamed to present himself in his birthday
robe in public.  Only he who has conquered his senses and mind can roam in a state of nudity in
public fearlessly and without the least emotional disturbance.

Some adopt this as a part of their Sadhana to overcome the body consciousness and such

people generally avoid the crowds.

Of course, there are people who impersonate realized sages and move about duping the
innocent  public.    But  people  can  easily  understand  these  pseudo-saints  by  their  reactions  and
hence shun them.

202.  On what grounds do you prohibit meat-eating?

On  medical,  psychological,  moral  and  spiritual  grounds.    The  mind  is  made  up  of  the
essence of the food that a man takes.  Tamasic food results in a Tamasic mind.  Meat is Tamasic
and hence should be avoided.

When an animal is killed or butchered, a contraction of its nervous system takes place on
account of fear. (And you might have felt certain disturbances in your own stomach when you
have  experienced  fear.)  This  leads  to  the  secretion  of  certain  poisons  in  the  liver,  etc.,  of  the
animal.  These poisons are cumulative in their nature and are never removed or lost during the
process of boiling or cooking meat.  Hence, meat-eating is poisonous and dangerous in the long
run.

There  is  no  difference  between  you  and  an  animal  when  both  are  considered  as  souls
inhabiting  the  bodies.    From  whichever  source  you  derive  the  right  to  live  and  enjoy  in  this
material body, from that very same source, the souls of these animals have derived equal rights to
live and enjoy in their material bodies.  Hence, you do not possess the moral right to kill a single
living being, however small it may be.

Last. but not the least, there is One Consciousness which has expressed itself in the form
of the various beings, animate and inanimate.  And this makes you one with all beings.  When
you have known this, will you consciously hurt any being?  Can you willingly and joyously cut
your own fingers and cook them and eat them?  Knowing this oneness alone is the purpose of
your coming again and again into the mundane plane.  You can know, feel and experience this
oneness only when you stop injuring and hurting others and begin to love all as your own Self.
Verily, the animals are thy own Self.  Thou alone art residing in these animals as the individual
souls and thou alone art manifest in the form of the material bodies in which these souls reside.
Hence,  wake  up;  stop  meat-eating  and  butchering  the  animals.    Develop  love  for  them  and
promote oneness.

79

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

203.    Some  people  have  alarmed  me  that  Pranayam  and  Sirshasan  are  dangerous
sometimes and it might turn a person mad even.  Though I discount such alarms, yet my
conviction  is  not  firm.    Kindly  write  of  any  possible  harm  accruing  from  the  practice  of
Pranayam and Sirshasan.

Be within your limits while performing Asans and Pranayam.  Do not strain yourself to
the point of exhaustion.  None turns mad by performing Sirshasan and Pranayam. There is a rule
for  everything.    Start  from  the  initial  stages  and  gradually  increase  the  period  as  you  find
improvement.

204.    Which  Yogic  Asans  can  a  married  lady  having  children  profitably  practice

without any harm accruing therefrom?

A Grihini with children can practice all the Asans subject to certain restrictions just as in
the case of a man.  She should not practice during the period of monthly courses and three or four
days thereafter, during any of the ailments peculiar to her sex, and during pregnancy.  Sirshasan,
Sarvangasan,  Matsyasan,  Halasan, 
and
Paschimottanasan  are  a  few  of  the  important  Asans  she  can  practice.    To  these  can  be  added
Yoga Mudra and Viparitakarani Mudra.  Kriyas and Bandhas, as also Surya Namaskaras, can be
performed  likewise.    The  only  conditions  necessary,  though  not  compulsory,  for  deft
performance  of  all  these  are  sliminess  of  body  and  balance  over  the  physical  frame.    There  is
absolutely no harm in a household lady practicing Asans, but she should subject herself to the
imposed restrictions cited above.

Padahastasan,  Bhujangasan, 

Salabhasan 

205.  What is meant by “killing of conscience”?

He who is pure in thought, speech and action, who fears sin and Adharma, who is pious,
God-fearing and equanimous, who is balanced and capable of maintaining equilibrium, will have
his  conscience  in  an  unblemished  state.    He  who  has  abundant  Sattva  (quality  of  purity)  will
always have an unmarred conscience.  Expansion of heart gives rise to the hearing of the voice of
conscience.  Inner guidance will always be to that individual who has Sattva in abundant measure
by way of Japa, Svadhyaya, Pranayam, selfless service and other elevative works (Yajna).

“Killing  of  conscience”  means  killing  of  what  is  divine  in  man,  killing  of  the  enviable
quality  of  Sattva,  expenditure  of  the  laudable  wealth  of  Dharma,  the  praiseworthy  treasure  of
spiritual  progress.    He  who  is  God-fearing  can  never  commit  anything  that  debases  him  or
degrades him in moral evolution.  To kill the conscience means to kill the God in man, to make
an end of all Daivi Sampat (wealth of divine qualities) and equal oneself to a brute and reduce
oneself to a spiritual cannibal.  True conscience is another name for the Antaratma or Inner Soul.
Go through my book “Ethical Teachings” in this connection.

206.  Is procreation a sin?

80

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Neither manhood nor womanhood nor procreation is a sin.  A seeker after Truth can beget
children and later take to the path of renunciation either in and through the world or entirely out
of the clutches of the world.  The moment one begets a male child for the upkeep of the progeny,
one can devote oneself wholeheartedly to Sannyasa if he so wishes, though it is not a hard and
fast  rule  to  have  a  male  child  before  taking  Sannyas.    The  need  for  a  male  child,  though  not
imperative, is in consonance with the Sruti.

207.    How  can  a  married  man  practice  Brahmacharya?    Is  it  possible  especially

when the couple are young?

To live and enjoy Grihastha life, with one’s own wife during the Ritu period subject to
the imposed restrictions of the Sastras is itself Brahmacharya.  Sastras say that the married man
should not indulge in sense-satisfaction as and when his senses prompt him to do so.  He should
subject  himself  to  the  various  restrictions  imposed  even  on  the  enjoyment  of  sense  life.    For
details in this respect, study my book, “Advice to Women”.  One who observes these  Sastraic
injunctions and leads a happy, well-regulated life is a perfect Brahmachari, though technically a
Grihastha.  Whatever be the natural ebullient impulses of the couple, and however young they be,
it is quite possible to observe Brahmacharya on the above lines.  Brahmacharya for a Grihastha
does not mean absolute abstention from enjoying the conjugal life; but means a well-disciplined,
self-restrained, Dharmic life.

208.  Is conscience not the mode by which we can listen to the inner Atman?

The pure conscience itself is the “Inner Voice”.  But the difficulty in the ordinary man is
that the voice of the lower mind, the voice of the brutal instincts, is often misunderstood as the
voice of conscience.  As a result of such misunderstanding, guided by his animal tendencies, he
commits colossal blunders, involving danger to others.  It requires a great degree of purity and
calmness of mind to hearken the true Inner Voice.

209.  May I know if you mean by ‘Sastras’ the age-old, written or unwritten, set and
rigid principles of ancient Hindu religious scriptures?    Have  these  principles  not  become
time-barred  due  to  the  fast-changing  conditions?    I  don’t  think  any  rigid  principle  can
stand the test of time.

Yes,  the  age-old,  written  or  unwritten  set  principles  of  the  ancient  Hindu  religious
scriptures are termed ‘Sastras’.  But because of this, it need not follow that they should become
time-barred.  The fundamental tenets of right living are unchanging.  There cannot be any sort of
difference in the fundamentals.

Modifications, alterations and adjustments are necessary; but these should be effected in
the external modes of interpretation and methods of application to suit the changing times and
the new environments of a new generation.

There is no harm in changing the externals so long as it does not affect the fundamental
principles.  Fundamental virtues like truth, fellowship, non-injury, purity, justice, integrity, etc.,

81

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

will  continue  to  be  applicable  to  the  life  of  humanity.    Violation  of  these  would  always  be  a
signal for coming calamity.

210.  Should the means to achieve good ends be always good?  Medicine tastes bitter,

but cures diseases.  Arjuna fought against the Kauravas to achieve good ends.

Indian thought has no hesitation in answering this question in the affirmative.  Except the
rank  materialists,  the  Charvakas,  the  founders  of  all  other  systems  of  Indian  thought  boldly
declare that “one should not adopt a foul means to achieve a desired end, however covetable that
end may be”.  There should not be any doubt regarding this point.

I don’t think that your two examples are strong enough to prove that the end justifies the
means.  For, the medicine, whether it be sweet or bitter, in so far as it does not do any harm to the
patient or anybody else while curing the disease, should be considered as a means free from any
fault.  It is a fair means to achieve the end, viz., cure of the disease.

In the second example, Arjuna fought the Kauravas and killed them all, no doubt.  But the
battle  fought  by  Arjuna  was  not  an  exhibition  of  cruelty,  but  an  execution  of  one’s  own  duty.
The war fell to his lot as pure duty or Svadharma.  Arjuna did not want it himself.  He did not
impose it on the Kauravas.  He was challenged to it by them.  He had to defend himself and his
clan.  As a Kshatriya, it was his sacred duty and moral responsibility to fight for the defense of
his rights.  Thus, Arjuna’s fighting the battle being purely duty-bound, is thoroughly justified.

Sri  Krishna  has  reiterated  this  point  in  several  places  in  the  Gita.    On  the  contrary,  if
Arjuna  had  shirked  away  his  responsibilities  of  fighting  the  battle,  then  he  would  have  been
failing  in  his  Dharma.    Hence  the  Lord’s  repeated  commands  to  him:  Svadharmamapi
Chavekshya Na Vikampitumarhasi (Waver not from your own duty on seeing it in front of you),
Yudhyasva Vigatajvara (Do thou fight, free from mental fever), etc.

211.    When  death  is  predestined  and  also  is  nothing  but  a  pause  to  change  the
clothes, why is it, then, a sin to commit suicide and also to kill living beings for a certain
cause?

Suicide  as  well  as  killing  of  other  beings  are  both  considered  to  be  great  sins,  as  they
block the course of evolution of the Jiva.  Moreover, putting an end to the present gross body by
force does not help one to put an end to his sufferings.  Sufferings and pleasures due to him by
virtue of his past actions won’t leave him until and unless they are enjoyed by him completely.

On the contrary, by suicide one is inviting more miseries, for it may take some time for
him to get another gross body in which he can enjoy the effects of his actions, and during this
interim  period,  he  may  have  to  move  about  in  the  form  of  a  Preta  or  ghost.    It  is,  of  course,
needless to say that killing a human being is a criminal offence legally and is totally heinous from
the point of view of spiritual progress, barring, of course, such contingencies as in a war.

82

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

212.  Why is it that the life-span of the modern man is so short as compared to that

of his ancestors?

Our  ancestors  used  to  have  a  well-regulated,  disciplined  life.    They  were  not  slaves  of
their  senses  as  the  modern  people  are.    They  used  to  do  Japa,  Pranayam,  Sandhyavandana
(Trikala)  and  Svadhyaya  (study  of  religious  books  like  the  Gita,  the  Bhagavata  and  the
Ramayana).  They used to do charity and selfless service, and observe Vratas like Ekadasi, Sri
Rama  Navami,  Sri  Krishna  Ashtami  and  Dattatreya  Jayanti.    They  used  to  conduct  spiritual
conferences and pray for world peace and not for their own individual selves.  They used to take
plenty  of  physical  exercise  in  the  form  of  walking  ten  to  twenty  miles  a  day  and  at  a  stretch.
They used to observe Yama and Niyama very rigidly.  They used to live mostly in villages and
not  in  congested  areas.  They  were  self-reliant  and  not  dependent  on  others  even  for  trivial
matters.  They used to have Kaya Siddhi as well as Vak Siddhi.  When the present-day generation
realizes the value of the way of ancient living, surely will it achieve all that it desires with the
Prasannata (grace) of the Devas.

213.    What,  according  to  you,  should  be  the  maximum  number  of  children  a

spiritual-minded Grihastha should have?

Every Grithastha, be he worldly-minded or spiritually-inclined, wishes to have a son to
keep up the lineage or the family line and a daughter to give an ineffable cosmic enlightenment
expressive of the Divine Mother (Prakriti) who is the creatrix and origin of the universe, for it is
from the womb of the Mother (Prakriti) that the entire creation is ushered into this world.  No
household couple is satisfied either with male issues or with female issues.  They want both, to
reveal themselves as the two reflections of their own individual selves, representative of Purusha
and  Prakriti.    Besides  these  two(cid:190)
there  can  be  one  extra  to  avoid
contingent mishaps like death and the like.  A spiritually-bent householder can lead the conjugal
life  up  to  the  limit  of  three  children.    Later  on  he  can  take  up  the  Nivritti  Marga  for  quick
evolution  and  realization.    Study  the  lives  of  realized  saints  like  Tukaram,  Ram  Tirth  and
Pothana.  You  will  understand  the  truth  behind  “realization  in  and  through  the  world”.    Over-
indulgence in sexuality or worldly life allows no access to spiritual matters.  In this connection, it
is worth the remembrance that children are not an absolute necessity for realization of Moksha,
that Moksha is not debarred from those that do not beget children, and also that they are prone to
exemption from the curses of the manes if they take to Sannyas without keeping up the lineage or
Vamsa Vriksha.

a  son  and  a  daughter(cid:190)

214.  Swamiji, why do you allow your feet to be worshipped, allow regular Puja to

be offered to your feet?

The materialistic modern mind needs a good flushing before it can understand this.  To
the spiritual aspirant, the Guru’s feet are not feet merely, but are the channels of divine grace.
From time immemorial, the Indian seeker after truth has known that his receptive centre, viz., the
head, should come into contact with the preceptor’s transmitting centre, the feet, in order to get
infused with spiritual power, wisdom and light.  This is one of the axioms of electricity, that the
positive and the negative poles should come into contact in order to complete the circuit.

83

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Pada Puja develops the spirit of self-surrender in the aspirant.  The flower symbolizing
the  heart,  the  fruits  symbolizing  the  fruits  of  all  actions,  coins  representing  all  wealth,  and
camphor symbolizing the very soul of the aspirant which gets totally absorbed in the enlightened
Self  of  the  Guru,  are  first  offered  in  worship.    And  finally,  the  aspirant  prostrates  at  the  feet,
signifying that everything without the least reservation is surrendered at the feet of the Satguru.

Pada Puja creates and strengthens the aspirant’s faith and devotion and  divine  qualities

like humility.

Bharata  worshipped  the  divine  feet  of  Lord  Rama  and  took  His  sandals  which  he
enthroned as Rama’s representatives; he regarded himself as the viceroy of the sandals.  It is such
humility, faith and devotion that will make you divine.

Here, I do not compel people to come and worship my feet; if they, of their own accord,
insist on doing so out of  their  Guru  Bhakti  towards  me,  I  cannot  refuse.    If  I  refuse,  I  will  not
only be displeasing those who are anxious to prove their  self-surrender  and  respect  to  me,  but
also, I will be failing in my duties.  Do you think I feel happy or elevated when they do Pada
Puja to me?  I have to sit patiently bearing all that process.  Surely it is not out of pleasure that I
agree to sit patiently!!

215.  What are the marks of a wise man and a fool respectively from the ultimate

point of view?

The  fool  reacts  outwardly  and  emotionally  under  all  circumstances,  while  there  is  no
reaction  in  the  sage.    If  at  all  the  latter  acts,  such  actions  are  not  reactions  to  any  immediate
action, but are born out of the sage’s Satsankalpa to serve humanity.  Secondly, in all situations,
the  fool  places  himself  first  but  finds  himself  last,  while  the  wise  man  places  himself  last  but
finds himself first.  Thirdly, the wise man retires silently as soon as he has done his work, but the
fool remains to ear others praise him, and in some cases, if nothing like it is coming forward, he
shamelessly asks for it.

Kindly read also the Second Chapter of the Gita, wherein you will find a nice description

of the Sthitaprajna.

216.  Which is more powerful in human beings(cid:190) hunger or the sex-urge?

The world of living beings has three things in common(cid:190) Ahara (food), Nidra (sleep) and
Sangama (copulation).  Food (Ahara) does not play so important a part as the sex-urge in man,
however much that sexual instinct develops in adolescence at the age of 16 in a male and 14 in a
female.  This age-limit is merely nominal and it differs in different climes and depends upon the
ways and habits of the individuals.  Whether a male or a female attains puberty or not, the sex
instinct  will  ever  be  there  by  natural  propensities  acquired  from  the  previous  births  and  by
witnessing common sights in the outside world.  Even when a person does not take food for days
together, the sexual impulses and libido will be there.  Even when the sexual urge fades or dies

84

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

out, either due to a far advanced age or some other reasons, the Vasana of impurity (craving for,
or dreaming of, sex enjoyment) may in all likelihood still persist in the cobweb corners of the
mind.  At the sight of something pleasant or beautiful, the impish mind may overpower a man to
recall any of the old experiences.  All these clearly prove that the sex instinct is more powerful
than hunger itself.  Sexual hunger is simply intensified by physical hunger, as flames of fire by
ablations of Ghee.  Physical hunger is merely subsidiary, while sexuality is primary in the role of
a man’s life.

217.  If a person has been forced into wedlock with a girl not at all beautiful, but
abounding in qualities of head and heart, what should characterize the attitude of that man
towards  his  wife,  constantly  worried  as  he  is  on  the  count  that  his  wife  is  not  beautiful?
How  can  he  manage  to  conceal  his  pent-up  feelings  of  frustration  caused  by  the  lack  of
beauty  in  his  wife(cid:190)
and  yet  manage  to  lead  a  healthy,  happy,
harmonious married life?

aesthetically  speaking(cid:190)

It is not in the power of man to choose this beautiful girl or that, nor in the power of a girl
to select this handsome or rich man or that.  Everything is predestined.  Man forgets this glaring
fact, ignores this essential truth and thinks and feels that he is the real doer or the enjoyer.  Say
and console yourself: “Daivadheen, Daivadheen. Lord’s Will, Lord’s Will”.  Think and feel that
everything that befalls your lot at any moment of your life is for the best.  Be convinced of this
grand truth and rejoice in philosophic indifference and stoic unconcernedness.  Physical beauty is
no beauty at all.  It is skin deep.  That woman who has the beauty of the virtue of chastity is the
really beautiful woman on earth.  This is in consonance with the proclamation of the great law-
giver Manu.  Study Manu Smriti, the Neeti Sastra of Manu.  Hammer the mind again and again
with the saying of Manu, “Chastity is the beauty of an ugly woman”.

Beauty  and  ugliness  are  mental  Kalpanas,  illusory  creations  of  the  mind  only,  just  as
sweetness or bitterness lies in the mind and mind alone.  Such are the Dharmas of the mind.  Rise
above the mind.  Then you will be able to find beauty in ugliness, sweetness in bitterness and
good in bad.  Even the ideas of goodness, sweetness and beauty disappear when the proper grade
of evolution is achieved.

The hand stands for Seva, the heart for Bhakti or Prem and the head for the intellect.  This
is a very rare combination which can be found in very few people.  Beauty is the inner spirit of
purity in a woman, at the very sight of which man is thrilled to horripilation and raised to heights
of elysian bliss.  That is to be treated as “true beauty”.

Always  try  to  see  the  good,  the  beautiful,  the  auspicious,  the  pleasant,  however
condemnable the worthy object of adoration be, on account of negative qualities.  Then and then
alone will you be able to evolve into the Infinite in greater and more abundant measure.  As long
as  man  limits  himself  with  constricted  notions  and  cherishes  debasing,  negative  and  dualistic
thoughts, he is not to be considered as an expanded soul.  Mentally prostrate before the woman
who has the virtues of an Adarsha Pativrata as embodied in the epics of Bharata Varsha.  Mend
yourself.  Feel that your position, your status, your earning capacity and your personality are but

85

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

trash and a trifle when compared to the abundant wealth of beauty of  solidified  virtue  of  your
wife. Give up egoistic assessment of values in life.

218.  Is the cinema an evil?  Does it corrupt public morals?  Please explain.

Cinema, as such, is not an evil, though it generally wrecks the health of people and spoils
their  eyesight,  when  indulged  in  inordinately.    And  it  leads  to  several  evil  contacts.    Its  great
condemnation is when it consists of sensational pictures, rousing the passions, exciting the senses
and causing a revolt of the immoral and non-ethical worldly propensities like lust, hatred, vanity,
agitation  or  any  form  of  sensuality  or  egoism.    Of  course,  there  is  no  harm  in  educational,
religious and spiritual pictures, though there is always a tendency in men to go beyond the limits
prescribed by the moral law and cultured habits.

219.  How to put a permanent end to all doubts and questions?

As one advances in spiritual Sadhana and attains a greater and greater degree of evolution
day by day, by regular and unremitting practice of the Yoga of Synthesis, the clouds of doubts,
delusion and interrogation disperse by themselves.  As the sun rises, the mist disappears.  Even
so, as you progress in the spiritual path by the Grace of Guru and God, all the intricate problems
of life and death dissolve themselves into the ever-abiding Truth of existence.  The only duty of
man is to intensify the inner purity by graded integral Sadhana.  Whenever doubts, troubles and
the like arise, repeat any one of the following Mantras: Om Sri Rama Saranam Mama or Om Sri
Krishna  Charanau  Saranam  Prapadye  or  your  Guru  Mantra.    There  is  no  room  for  doubts  to
crop  up  on  the  attainment  of  God-realization,  as  the  seeker  is  no  longer  the  seeker,  but  God
Himself.

220.  I meditate every now and then on God’s glory and omnipotence, but seem to

derive no tangible results therefrom.  Reasons  for it please.

There is no use of praying to the Lord by fits and starts or every now and then.  Do Japa
and meditation regularly without any break even for a single day.  Just as you do not give up tea
and meals even for a single day, and just as you do no forget them too, so also, do  not  forget
Sadhana(cid:190) whatever little you can(cid:190)
and then only take your meals.  This is a sure and potent way
of goading and compelling the mind to penetrate itself deeply and unavoidably into the spiritual
practices.  By following this procedure, you get used to doing Sadhana regularly at least for the
sake of the meals that is necessarily to succeed, in spite of the unwillingness of the mind.

When  the  mind  undergoes  phases  of  transition  in  enjoying  the  charm  of  the  world,  it
cannot concentrate upon itself and direct the gaze within itself.  Pull the reins of the mind back
towards  itself  as  it  goes  out  hither  and  thither.    Continue  this  process  several  times  in  a  day.
When you develop strength of will to realize the Lord by intense efforts, progress automatically
sets in.  Read the Second Chapter of the Gita with meaning.  You will have a clear understanding
of the remedy for setbacks in Sadhana.

86

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

221.    Does  it  not  involve  the  sin  of  disobedience  if  a  person  becomes  a  Sadhu

disregarding the pious wishes of his parents?

No doubt it helps a person if he takes to Sadhuhood or Sannyasahood with the permission
of  his  parents  and  other  closely  related  ones;    or  else,  it  is  likely  to  affect  the  interests  of  the
individual.    But  there  is  absolutely  no  harm  if  he  takes  to  the  Nivritti  Marga  or  the  path  of
renunciation when there is a very high degree of Vairagya.

No man in the world is related to any other from the absolute metaphysical standpoint and
whatever relationship exists between one and the other is, after all, by dint of Karmas performed
previously.  Human beings associate and dissociate themselves just as two pieces of wood in a
flowing river.  When the time ripens, everything resolves itself into One.  This makes it clear that
one is at liberty to take Sannyas at any desired moment without incurring any inequity, provided
one  has  the  staunch  Bhav  that  nobody  is  related  to  anybody  in  this  world,  and  that  everybody
stands by himself to seek his goal.

222.  Do you believe in heaven and hell existing as some independent planes apart

from this earth-plane of ours?

Why not?  They are also planes of existence just like ours.  They are as real as the earthly
plane.  All the worlds (Lokas) and all the Tirthas (sacred rivers) are existent in the human being
himself, if he has belief in the scriptures.  One can enjoy heaven or  hell in this birth if he so
wishes.    The  greater  the  grossness,  the  more  intense  will  be  the  torture  and  suffering  till  such
time  as  the  individual  is  refined  and  fit  for  the  descent  of  the  Lord’s  grace  by  repeated
calcinations or purificatory processes.

If you want to enjoy heaven on earth, go on purifying yourself by controlling the lower
mind, the desires and cravings.  All is bliss, all is joy, all is happiness then.  If you allow a free
rein to the horses of the senses and yield to the prompting of the devilish mind, if you follow the
path of Adharma, hell itself will prevail, not elsewhere in some incredible region, but here on this
earth itself.

223.  The Koran for the Muslims, the Bible for the Christians, the Old Testament for

the Jews, the Gathas for the Parsis.  What about the Hindus?

The Gita, of course.  That is the simple, basic scripture for all Hindus.  It contains the
essence of the Upanishads, gives an optimistic and ideally adequate philosophy of life and shows
the main paths of Yoga in an integrated perspective.

224.    Since  you  are  an  advocate  of  equality  and  your  teachings  do  not  take  into

consideration class distinctions, are you in sympathy with communism?

I have nothing to do with politics, much less with any Godless creed.  I do not believe that
religion or religious teachings should have anything to do with politics.  I advocate equal vision
in the sense that the One Reality dwells equally in all beings.  Names and forms are changing

87

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

phenomena.  Spirit alone is.  In a relative sense, the whole humanity is the family of God; there is
no high or low in His eyes.  As such, a spiritual man’s attitude should not be narrowed down by
any kind of distinction, be it of class, religion, caste or colour.

225.  Is God conscious or unconscious?  If He is conscious, He must have a forms for

only a being who has a body can be conscious.

God is pure consciousness.  He is omniscient, all-knowing.  He is Nirakara, formless or
incorporeal.  This  physical  body  has  limited  our  universal  consciousness.    Consciousness  is  of
various  kinds,  viz.,  physical  consciousness,  mental  consciousness  and  absolute  consciousness.
You  will  experience  the  highest  consciousness  when  you  transcend  the  three  bodies  through
constant and intense meditation.  With this physical body and limited senses you can have the
physical consciousness only.

226.  If I say, “I am a king”, I cannot become a king.  So also, if I repeat “Aham

Brahma Asmi”, I cannot become Brahman.

Besides saying “I am a king”, you will have to prepare yourself.  You will have to gather
a large number of men. You will have to learn many things.  You will have to fight.  Even so,
you  will  have  to  prepare  and  purify  the  mind.  You  will  have  to  acquire  the  four  means  of
salvation(cid:190) Viveka (discrimination between the real and the unreal), Vairagya (dispassion), Shad
Sampat (sixfold virtues) and Mumukshutva (eagerness for liberation).  Then you will have to do
Sravana  (hearing  of  the  Srutis),  Manana  (reflection)  and  Nidhidhyasan  (constant  and  profound
meditation).  Then only you will get Atma Sakshatkara or Brahma Anubhava.

227.  If I say, ‘Sugar’, ‘Sugar’, I cannot get sugar.  If I say ‘Ram, Ram’, I cannot get

God.

You  will  have  to  earn  money  for  purchasing  sugar.    Then  you  will  have  to  go  to  the
bazaar to purchase sugar.  Here also, you will have to get rid of lust, anger, greed, delusion, pride,
jealousy  and  egoism  and  then  repeat  ‘Ram,  Ram’  with  Bhav  (feeling)  and  single-minded
devotion.  Then you will have Darshan of Lord Rama.  But, Rama is within.  Sugar is outside.
You will have to give your whole heart to Rama.

228.  How to enter Samadhi quickly?

If you want to enter Samadhi quickly, cut off all connections with friends, relatives, etc.
Do not write letters to anybody.  Observe Akhanda Mouna or the vow of continued silence for
one month.  Live alone.  Walk alone.  Take very little but nutritious food; live on milk alone if
you can afford.  Plunge in deep meditation.  Dive deep.  Have constant practice.  You will be
immersed in Samadhi.

Be  cautious.    Use  your  common  sense.    Do  not  make  violent  struggle  with  the  mind.

Relax.  Allow the divine thoughts to flow gently in the mind.

88

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

229.  Why should there be evil?

This  is  a  question  which  still  remains  unanswered  by  sages,  Rishis,  Acharyas  and
Philosophers.  Do not put this question now.  You cannot understand it now in your present stage
of evolution.  It is inexplicable, inscrutable, Anirvachanee Maya.  Brahman or God only knows.
You  will  understand  it  only  when  you  get  rid  of  Maya,  when  you  attain  the  knowledge  of
Brahman.    This  question  is  put  in  another  way  also.    Why  has  God  created  this  universe?
Nobody knows the why and how of this universe.  Don’t rack your brain on this point now.  You
won’t get an answer.  You will only waste your energy.  Try to go beyond evil.  There are ways.
Know them and exert.

230.  How to get rid of desires?

Develop Viveka or the power of discrimination.  Brahman is real.  The world is unreal.
There is no Vasana or desire in Brahman.  The desire is in the mind.  Make Vichara.  All desires
will dwindle into nothing.  Mark the Doshas in the objects.  The objects are Asat, Jada, Duhkha,
impure.  Develop burning Mumukshutva.  This strong desire for Self-realization will destroy all
other worldly desires.  Control the Indriyas also.  Develop Vairagya.  Give up objects.  This is
Tyaga.  All desires will melt away.

231.  If we are tools in the hands of God, are not men free?

Man  becomes  free  only  when  his  individual  will  becomes  merged  in  the  Divine  Will.
Licentiousness and autocracy must not be mistaken for spiritual freedom.  By becoming a tool
(Nimitta) in the hands of God, the Bhakta destroys the egoism or the little false ‘I’, but gains all
the Divine Aisvarya or the Siddhis of the Lord.  He becomes perfectly free.  He has become one
with God now.

232.  How shall I prepare myself for a contemplative life?

Divide your property between your three sons.  Keep something for yourself to keep the
life going.  Distribute a portion in charity.  Build a Kutir in Rishikesh and live there.  Don’t write
letters to your sons.  Don’t enter into the plains.  Then start meditation.  Your mind will rest in
peace now.  Do this at once.  You must hurry up.

233.  When I was living in Uttarkashi, I had good Nishtha, exalted Vrittis and good
Dharma.  I have lost them now after entering the plains, even though I do Sadhana.  Why?
How to raise myself as before?

Contact with worldly-minded people at once affects the mind.  Vikshepa comes in.  The
mind  imitates.    Bad,  luxurious  habits  are  developed.    Bad  environments  and  bad  associations
play a tremendous part and produce a bad influence on the mind of Sadhaks.  Old Samskaras are
revived.    I  will  ask  you  to  run  at  once  to  Uttarkashi,  back  again.    Don’t  delay  even  a  single
minute.  As the mind is formed out of the subtlest part of the food, i.e., gets attached to that man

89

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

from whom it receives its food. Don’t be under obligation to anybody.  Lead an independent life.
Rely on your own self.

234.  What is God?

If I give you a good slap on your face, who knows that slap?  That knower (Vetta), that
knowing subject, is God.  When a strong desire is satisfied or gratified, that blissful state wherein
the  mind  finds  rest  is  God.    That  which  sparkles  or  glitters  in  your  eyes  is  God.    That  which
prompts you to think is God, the Lord of the mind.  The source (Yoni) or support (Adhishthan)
for your mind, Prana, senses and body is God.

The  tree  exists.    It  shines.    It  gives  delight.    These  three  aspects,  existence,  shining,
delight(cid:190) Asti-Bhati-Priya  or  Sat-Chit-Ananda(cid:190)
is  God.    God  is  truth.    God  is  love,  God  is
beauty.  God is Ananda.  God is Light of lights.  God is Mind of minds, Prana of Pranas, Soul of
souls.    That  shines  in  your  heart  and  that  is  inseparable  from  you.    Feel  His  presence  always.
Recognize His presence always, everywhere.  Carry His presence when you walk.

235.  Why does God create rogues?

As  this  is  a  relative  world,  there  must  be  rogues  and  honest  men.    A  rogue  is  not  an
eternal rogue.  A rogue is the saint of the future.  Roguery is a negative virtue.  It is not a separate
entity.  Honesty will have no existence in the absence of roguery.  The raison d’etre of roguery is
to glorify honesty.  Roguery and honesty are the obverse and the reverse of the same coin.  They
are mental creations only.  Even a rogue has some virtues.  There is neither absolute roguery nor
absolute honesty.  God Himself plays the part of a rogue in the world’s drama for His Lila.  There
is neither John nor Peter.

236.    When  I  was  at  Swargashram,  your  good  self  told  me  that  we  should  take
eatables  from  the  hands  of  Mohammedans  and  should  never  hesitate  from  doing  so.  But
our  Shastras  teach  us  that  we  should  not  accept  eatable  things  from  a  great  sinner.
Mohammedans eat beef.  Why should we accept any eatable thing from their hands?

If you think that a man is full of vicious deeds, do not take food from his hands.  If you
think that Lord Siva or Hari dwells even in an evil-minded man, if you entertain this strong idea,
you can eat from anybody’s hands.  Your Drishti or angle of vision is very limited now.  You are
a beginner in the spiritual line.  Your heart is not expanded now.  Do plenty of Japa and other
religious practices, which I have taught you, wholeheartedly.  Feel His indwelling presence in a
stone, flower, spoon, towel, in everything.  After some time you will be elevated.  You will see
the Lord only in everything.  You have now got a strong anti-Mohammedan Samskara.  Destroy
it  gradually.    Love  a  Mohammedan  from  the  bottom  of  your  heart.    Serve  him  with  great
devotion.  See Hari in his sparkling eyes, in the throbbing of his heart.  Have Sattvic Ahara, any
kind of pure food.  Offer it to God first and then take it as Prasada or sacrament.  Repeat His
Name before you take food.  Thus you can purify or spiritualize any kind of impure food.

90

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

237.  Yoga practice, they say, is meant only for men, because it is they who require
control.  I wonder what work is assigned to women, then!  Sit at home and breed children, I
presume!  But, is it a fact that only men need the Yoga practice?  Can women not become
great Yoginis in the same way as men become great Yogis?  Or, does it depend on the sex
also?  Why has sex stood between women and spiritual greatness?

Queen Chudalai was a great Yogini.  She had many higher Siddhis.  She even converted
her husband Sikhidhvaja and helped him in his salvation.  Read the story of Chudalai in Yoga
Vasishtha.  Ladies lack in Vairagya and in the power of endurance.  They have not got the same
faculties as men have.  Hence many Yoginis do not crop up amongst ladies.  Ladies  can  have
Darshan of the Lord easily as they have ingrained devotion in them, as the element of Sneha or
love is predominant in them.  Sex is no bar to spiritual greatness.  Gargi, Madalasa and Sulabha
were all reputed Yoginis.

238.  How does a Jnani look into the objects?  Describe his vision.

This is indescribable.  This is one’s feeling.  Sometimes when you sleep, you scratch the
body and drive off flies.  If anybody asks you, “Do you remember the scratching, the driving off
of flies, when you were asleep?”, you will say, “No”.  Similarly, even though a Jnani sees, he
does  not  see.    He  is  always  conscious  of  his  Svarupa.    If  he  likes,  he  can  have  a  double
consciousness  and  turn  his  vision  that  side  and  this  side  also.    His  activities  are  like  those  of
children.    Owing  to  the  mental  retentum(cid:190)
the  force  of  the  old  Subha  Vasanas  and  the  Lesha
Avidya or trace of ignorance(cid:190)
his activities are kept up.  Just as the tin in which asafoetida or
garlic had been kept emits the smell of these drugs even though the tin is washed several times
and water, this trace of Avidya remains in the Jivanmukta till Prarabdha wears away.  He is not
doing actions at all from his own viewpoint.  The bystanders think that the Jnani also is working.
But we have to admit that there is Lesha Avidya or a trace of ignorance, because we notice that
the Jnani also eats, bathes and answers calls of nature.

239.  You have said in one of your lessons that the aspirant should fast only once a
month.  But Gandhiji and others have stressed the importance of  fasting.    They  say  that
one  should  fast  at  least  three  or  four  times  in  a  month.    Moreover,  they  point  out  that
fasting helps self-control.  How is it that you do not allow frequent fasting?

Fasting does help in self-control.  But, too much fasting weakens the body and the mind
and  retards  spiritual  Sadhana.    I  am  also  a  strong  votary  of  fasting.    Fasting  is  a  great
Prayaschitta.  It expiates any kind of sin quickly.  It has got a tremendous purifying influence on
the  heart.    Read  Manu  Smriti.    As  the  vast  majority  are  afraid  of  fasting  too  much,  I  have
prescribed only a day of fasting in a month.  Young, robust, plethoric people can fast twice or
thrice in a month if passion troubles them much.

240.  I am a theist.  Why is it that I become an atheist sometimes when I mix with

materialistic people?

91

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Your  spiritual  Samskaras  are  not  yet  strong.    You  are  not  yet  moulded  properly.    You
need Satsang for one year more.  You should repeat 200 Malas of any Mantra daily (200 x 108 =
21,600  times).    You  should  take  Sattvic  food  only,  such  as  rice,  Dhal,  bread,  fruits  and  milk.
Give up meat at once.  Observe Mouna for two hours daily.  Live alone for two hours in a room.
Introspect.  Meditate.  Watch your thoughts carefully.

241.  Will there be continuity of consciousness during suspension of breath?  Kindly

explain to me with an illustration.

Hari Singh was a Hatha Yogi.  He was buried underneath the ground in a box for three
months in Ranjit Singh’s court.  He came back with life when the box was opened.  Hatha Yogis
block the Talu Chakra, the posterior nasal openings, with their elongated tongue that is obtained
through Bahir Kechari Mudra Kriya of Chalan (moving the tongue frequently), Doshan (dragging
the tongue with butter) and Chedan (cutting the frenulum lingua that is underneath the tongue).
They drink slowly the nectar that dribbles from the Sahasrara Chakra through the opening in the
palate.    This  instance  of  Hari  Singh  clearly  indicates  that  the  real  “I”  is  entirely  distinct  from
Prana.  In spite of the suspension of breath, Hari Singh had continuity of consciousness.

242.  It takes a long time to remove Mala and Vikshepa. What to do?

If you want to become a Master of Arts, it takes a large number of years.  You will have
to  pass  through  the  Matriculation,  Intermediate  and  B.A.  courses  and  then  take  up  the  M.A.
course.  Even so, you will have to plod on and persevere for many years to remove the Mala and
the Vikshepa.  How patiently does the fisherman wait with concentrated gaze to catch a single
fish!  When such is the case for a trifling thing, what to speak of attaining Brahma-Jnana?  It is
Kshurasya Dhara, walking along the blade of a sharp razor.

243.  A Vritti arises: “Let me renounce the world and do Bhajan in a secluded place
like  Rishikesh”.    Immediately  another  Vritti  arises:  “Let  me  remain  as  a  Grihastha  and
practice  Yoga  like  Janaka”.    How  can  I  know,  Swamiji,  whether  this  particular  Vritti
comes from the Atma or the mind or the Buddhi?  I am perplexed.

An ordinary worldly-minded man can hardly hear the inner voice of Atma.  He cannot get
pure thoughts of Vichara also.  Any Sattvic thought emanates from the Sattvic Buddhi.  In the
case of worldlings, all thoughts emanate from  the  mind  only.    He  who  does  Nishkama  Karma
Yoga  and  has  purity  of  mind  begins  to  entertain  thoughts  of  God.    Generally  the  mind  raises
various sorts of curious, fantastic thoughts.  It deludes all.  It may pretend to do Vichar.  When it
comes to practicality, it will do nothing.  If there is serious determination in you to concentrate
and meditate, and if you put it into actual practice for months steadily and if the longing for the
Darshan of God or Self-realization becomes keen and acute, then alone think that all these kinds
of thoughts proceed from your Sattvic Buddhi only.

244.  Can you please give me some detailed practical hints to get non-attachment in

mind in our every action?

92

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Think that you are an instrument (Nimitta) in the hands of God when you work.  Egoism
and respectability will vanish.  Don’t expect fruits for your actions (Nishkamya).  How can you
expect fruits when another, viz., God, is working through you?  Further, when you are aware that
the world is full of miseries, what is the use of coming back again into the world ? You are a toy
in the hands of God.  He holds the string.  He is the Sutradhar.  Do all actions from a sense of
duty.  Reduce your wants.  Lead a very simple life.  Hate luxury.  Control the Indriyas.  Look at
everyone and everything in the world as the manifestation of Narayana.  Think that this world is
illusory  and  a  long  dream.    How  can  there  be  attachment  now  in  the  mind,  my  dear
Ramachandra?  If you do actions in this way, you will become a practical Yogi.  I assure you.
Cheer your spirit.  Gird up the loins and engage yourself boldly in the daily battle of life.

245.  Why should God drive me to do a bad action?

God never drives you to do any bad action.  He is always the Sakshi or witness.  Your
own nature, your own evil Samskaras, force you to do actions. “Svabhavastu Pravartate” says
the Gita (Ch.  V-14).  You lack in Viveka or discrimination.  That is the reason why you become
a slave of passion.  God has given you Buddhi to check passion.  Why don’t you use it then?

246.  I never intend to do any evil action.  Is it my responsibility when I do it?  If it
is, will God forgive me?  If He forgives me, what about the fruit of that action?  I write to
you candidly, for I have chosen you to be my noble guide.  Please forgive me and help me.

You are certainly responsible for the action.  God never forgives.  Action brings on its
own  fruits.    Through  Prayaschitta  or  expiatory  rites  you  can  destroy  the  evil  effects  of  a  bad
action.    You  actually  suffer  in  Prayaschitta.    Hence  the  evil  effects  are  washed  off.    The  evil
Karma will not follow you to the next birth.  Sincere repentance, Japa, fasting and charity can
destroy the evil effects of bad Karma.  In repentance you actually suffer.  This serves to wash off
the evil effects of the bad action.  Repentance must be done with a contrite heart.  You must not
repeat the evil action again.

247.  Why do different prophets give contradictory teachings?

Prophets are born from time to time to remove a catastrophe and establish Dharma.  They
preach according to the time, place, conditions and requirements.  Lord Buddha preached, “Don’t
kill”.  Guru Govind  Singh  preached,  “Kill”.    When  Buddha  was  born,  people  were  sacrificing
many  animals.    He  had  to  preach  Ahimsa  to  stop  killing.    Guru  Govind  Singh  had  to  infuse
chivalry  in  man.    One  prophet  preached,  “Renounce  and  go  to  the  forest”.    Sri  Ramanuja
preached,  “Enjoy  at  home.    Have  no  attachment.    Worship  Vishnu”.    The  teachings  are  not
contradictory in reality.  They are needed to suit the occasion, time and nature of men.

248.    Why  has  God  created  some  souls  in  a  pure  state  and  others  in  a  state  of
cruelty?  Why does He make some do bad acts and prevent their becoming good?  When
can I have perfection?

93

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

You  can  have  perfection  and  immortality  through  long  struggle.    The  mortal  in  the
relative plane does good and evil acts.  Evil also is a negative good.  Out of evil, sometimes good
comes.  Everyone learns lessons in this world and evolves.  God is only a witness.  He does not
make men do evil acts.  Man has intellect and free will.  Man, out of his egoism, does actions
according to his own sweet will and reaps the fruits of evil actions.  When the Sattvic material or
purity increases by practicing virtuous actions, he becomes divine.  God is not responsible.

249.  You say that forgiveness should be practiced.  Being not the final authority in
my office, I cannot save my subordinates from getting punished.  If I conceal their offences
or mistakes, I will not be doing my duty properly and this may one day get me into trouble.
When I forward the reports of my subordinates, they are punished and I feel sorry for it.
What should I do in such cases?

You can forgive the minor mistakes of your servants and subordinates.  This cannot bring
in any trouble.  Keep your conscience clean.  Warn them whenever they commit mistakes.  As
you  are  in  the  Vyavaharic  field,  you  will  have  to  punish  those  who  commit  serious  mistakes.
But, be unbiased.  Have fear of God.  If poor servants are fined, give them some money from
your own pocket.  Love them.  They will not commit mistakes in future.

250.  May I enquire how the power of concentration increases?

Concentration  increases  by  curtailing  your  wants  and  desires,  by  observing  Mouna  for
two  hours  daily,  by  remaining  in  seclusion  in  a  quiet  room  for  one  or  two  hours  daily,  by
practicing Pranayam, by prayer, by increasing the number of sittings in meditation in the evening
and at night, by Vichar, etc.

251.  How is it possible that a Creator, so full of love, created a world and a nature
where animals can live only by killing other animals that have to endure terrible pain and
suffering?  Nobody can give me a satisfactory answer.

If  men  kill  each  other,  it  is  sin;  they  need  not.    But,  animals  cannot  live  without

killing the other animals for food. What do you say? We are anxious for your opinion.

God’s love for the created universe knows no bounds; He cannot be held responsible for
the experiences of created beings.  God does not punish or reward anyone in a personal way; it is
one’s own actions, sinful or good, that works as the cause of experience here.

As  the  human  being  is  endowed  with  moral  sense  and  as  he  is  invested  with  the
consciousness of doership and responsibility, he imposes this sense of morality and responsibility
of action on sub-human beings also.  The defect, therefore, lies in man and not in the animals
which  act  without  any  consciousness  of  ethical  conduct,  and  spontaneously,  free  from  the
responsibility connected with doership or agency.

No  action  can  produce  a  retributive  effect  unless  it  is  done  with  the  consciousness  of
personal doership and responsibility.  Man shall be punished by retributive justice, for man has
the freedom to act and he is responsible for what he does.  But animals have not been endowed

94

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

with  such  a  freedom  and  power  of  understanding  and  reason;  so  what  they  do  is  just  the
expression of the instinctive natural promptings in them and this is included in the scheme of the
universal nature.  Nature is beyond moral laws.  Moral conduct is only for man, meant to restrict
his  behaviour  and  lead  him  on  to  universal  consciousness  through  gradual  ascent  along  the
evolutionary ladder.

All things born must die.  And there should be some immediate cause for the destruction
of  things.    This  cause  of  destruction  may  be  another  animal,  an  earthquake,  a  thunder-stroke,
flood,  disease,  storm  or  any  such  thing.    These  should  not  be  clothed  with  moral  and  ethical
values except when these are connected with human agency.

252.  Sometimes I hush up things in my mind.  I get mental torments thereby.  What

shall I do to get rid of this habit?

You must be frank and as simple as a child.  Then only you will get the divine light.  You
will grow spiritually.  Even if it is a horrible crime, you must admit it before a Guru.  Then only
you will get his sympathy and protection.  By admitting your faults before others, you remove the
effects of bad actions.  It serves as a Prayaschitta or expiatory action.

253.    What  are  the  advantages  of  Mouna  or  the  vow  of  silence?    Should  I  also

observe?

Observe Mouna for a couple of hours daily at any time that suits you.  Try to speak little
at other times.  Avoid unnecessary conversations.  Don’t talk harsh words and obscene language.
Talk sweetly and gently.  You must have perfect control over speech.  Control over speech means
control of mind.    The  organ  of  speech,  Vak  Indriya,  is  a  great  distractor  of  the  mind.    Mouna
gives you peace.  It removes anxieties and quarrels.  It develops your will power.  It conserves
energy.  It reduces the force of Sankalpa or the thought-current.

254.  Will a Jivanmukta also take birth?

Some  Jivanmuktas  whose  hearts  are  filled  with  mercy  and  Vyavahar  Apeksha  for
Lokasangraha like the Buddhistic Arhats may, out of their own free will, take a birth(cid:190)
like Sri
Sankara, Sri Dattatreya or Jnana Dev.  They need not do any Sadhana as they are born Siddhas.
At once they appear as spiritual luminaries, do some spiritual preaching, write out some precious
philosophical  books,  set  aright  some  catastrophe,  pass  off  quickly  and  merge  in  Brahman
(Videha Kaivalvam).  They are all Amsa-Avataras with special Isvara Kala (spiritual rays).

255.  God-realized souls, on leaving the mortal coil, merge in the cosmos and thus do
not have any individuality on any plane.  However, it is claimed that saints like Sai Baba
and others, who have attained Moksha,  do  help  and  guide  those  devotees  who  seek  their
blessings.  How can we explain this apparent contradiction?

Realized  souls,  who  wish  to  help  the  devotees  even  after  they  give  up  their  physical
bodies, retain their astral bodies (Sukshma Sarira) for the sake of their eagerness to help those

95

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

that are in need of their help.  But Jivanmuktas, generally, do not retain their astral bodies just in
order to help the aspirants, since there will always be highly evolved souls on the relative plane,
who will carry on the task of teaching the spiritual aspirants.

256.  At times I feel that I am entrapped in Maya and try to extricate myself.  At
other times I feel that I am the Atma which is changeless and pure.  I am looking for your
Kripa which will certainly take me out of this ocean of troubles.  Any instructions?

You  are  in  the  struggling  stage.    You  are  doubtless  progressing.    You  will  soon  be
established  in  your  real  Svarup.    Fear  not.    Plod  on.    Persevere.    Don’t  look  back.    March  on
boldly.    The  goal  is  very  near.    Be  a  Sakshi  of  all  your  actions.    You  are  Asanga,  Akarta
(unattached, non-doer).  Thou art that Immortal Atma!

257.    I  am  having  spiritual  practice  for  the  last  three  years.    I  do  not  find  any

improvement.  Why?

There is improvement.  Your mental images are strong and steady now.  Remember that
there is no barometer or thermometer to read your spiritual progress in the spiritual realm.  You
are now giving only half of your mind to God.  Collect the dissipated rays and give the full mind
to God.  I assure you, “You will realize Him this very moment”.

258.  Difficulties and anxieties upset me in every way. Failure and troubles face me

on every side.  Domestic duties trouble my Sadhana.  What shall I do, my Lord?

Don’t be afraid.  Remember the saying, “Even this will pass away”.  Write this on a piece
of  paper  in  bold  types  and  fix  it  on  the  wall  in  your  room.    Difficulties  and  troubles  are
Agamapaya.    They  come  and  go.    Read  Verse  14  in  Chapter  2  of  Srimad  Bhagavad  Gita.
Become a hero.  Stand firm as a rock.  Live in the Centre.  Live in Om.  Live in Truth or Atma.
Nothing  can  shake  you.    Difficulties  will  make  you  more  strong  and  endow  you  with  more
endurance.  Mysterious are His ways.  Say, “Thy will be done”.

259.  How is it that we see many wicked persons flourishing in this world while the

good souls suffer?  Why is God merciful to some and heartless to some else?

This is an age-old question, as old as the world itself.  The great Bhishma shed tears when
he was on his death-bed.  When questioned why he cried, he replied that the Pandavas were great
devotees  of  the  Lord  and  always  abided  by  the  laws  of  Dharma.    Above  all,  the  Lord  was
constantly with them in the form of Krishna.  And yet they underwent so much of suffering.

Some  wicked  persons  do  flourish  in  this  world  of  hypocrisy,  but  it  does  not  mean  that
they are free from suffering.  The really good souls  do  not  suffer  as  much  as  the  ‘flourishing’
wicked ones, for peace is in the hearts of the former.  To be able to abide by the ideals they hold
sacred  is  by  itself  a  great  cause  of  happiness.    The  welfare  and  the  misery  of  people  can  be
explained only in terms of the law of Karma.

96

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Good  persons  suffer  because  of  the  mistakes  they  had  committed  in  their  past
incarnations.  Wicked persons, who seem to be well off, are now reaping the results of their past
good actions, but will have to pay the price of their present ones, later.  It is the law of Karma
that lifts God above all the good and the bad conditions of man.  If God were made responsible
for the material state of affairs of the individual or the enjoyment or suffering of man, then God
would  cease  to  be  God,  for  a  partial  God,  dishing  out  favours  to  some  and  withholding  them
from the others, would be no God at all.

260.  What is the feeling of a Jnani when he eats a mango or some delicious food?

He has not the idea of Bhokta, Bhoga and Bhogya (enjoyer, enjoyment  and  enjoyable).
The eating of a mango will not produce any Samskara in him.  He will not think again at a certain
time,  “I  ate  a  delicious  mango  at  Mr.  Raman’s  bungalow  last  year”.    He  has  not  the  Kama
Sankalpa.    He  is  free  from  the  Bhav,  “Aham  Bhokta”  or  “I  am  enjoyer”.    He  is  aware  of  the
hunger.  He is aware that hunger is the Dharma of the Pranamaya Kosha and that something or
the other should be thrust inside the stomach to appease this hunger.

261.    Can  you,  at  a  distance  half  across  the  earth,  intuit  the  nature  of  my  life-

mission?

Your life-mission is absolute dedication of all your faculties to the Lord, and not to be
curious to know how He is to make use of you.  It is not for nothing that He has hidden from our
view His higher purposes.  Our little mind cannot reason out the meanings of events which He
brings  to  pass.    So  He  does  not  take  off  the  veil  nor  need  we  be  curious  to  know.    Surrender
yourself to Him completely.  He has already chosen you and He will give you commissions from
time to time.  Carry them out unselfishly and rise up higher and higher in Divine service.  That
will  be  the  true  expression,  in  thought  and  deed,  of  your  love  for  God  and  His  creation,  the
world.

262.    Is  it  true  that  death  (voluntary  or  otherwise)  places  us  in  a  more  conducive
environment in the next birth for the fulfillment of certain deep-rooted desires which are
otherwise difficult to fulfil in this life?

Death need not necessarily place one in a more conducive environment in the next birth.
That depends upon the quality of man’s actions during the present birth as well as in the remoter
past.  It is true that our desires guide our future births to a great extent.

263.  Which among the Yogic Asans will help a married lady to keep her youth for a

considerable period?

Sarvangasan,  Matsyasan,  Sirshasan,  Padahastasan,  Halasan,  Paschimottanasan  and
Chakrasan,  coupled  with  Yoga  Mudra  and  Viparitakarani  Mudra,  help  quite  a  lot  to  keep  up
bodily poise and tension.  All these need not necessarily be taken up simultaneously.  Whichever
of these are found convenient can be practiced, along with Pranayam, within the boundary limits

97

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

of  health  and  not  overriding  the  limitations  of  her  sex.    A  lover  of  Yoga(cid:190) male  or
female(cid:190)

should have restricted carnal desires.

264.  Why do the Hindus give more importance to the Bhagavad Gita than to Uttara

Gita?

The  Bhagavad  Gita  is  more  comprehensive  and  detailed  in  the  exposition  of  the
philosophy and teachings of Sri Krishna.  Rather, it is a magnum opus among the scriptures of
the Hindus, and so, in substance and scope, it is more important than the Uttara Gita, also of Sri
Krishna.  But please note that there are many Gitas, such as Anu Gita, Avadhuta Gita and so on,
all of which are helpful to the spiritual aspirant.  Yet, among all Gitas(cid:190)
quite a few dozens of
them, major and minor(cid:190)
, the Bhagavad Gita is the most important, integral, comprehensive and
the best.

265.  I understand the biggest mistake an aspirant often makes is to falsely identify
lower Samadhi with higher or the highest Samadhi; but, how can a man who makes such a
mistake guard himself against it?

When one rises to the state of Samadhi, he does not make the mistake of doubting as to

whether it is lower or higher or the highest.  He knows what it is without doubt, quite naturally.

266.    What  are  the  marks  of  spiritual  progress?    How  can  I  know  whether  he  is

advanced in the spiritual path or not?

Peace,  cheerfulness,  contentment,  dispassion,  fearlessness  and  an  unperturbed  state  of

mind under all conditions indicate that you are advancing in the spiritual path.

Spiritual progress is not measured by Siddhis or powers, but only by the depth of  your

bliss in meditation.

These are sure tests of your spiritual progress:

Is your interest in inner spiritual activity and outer Sadhana increasing day after day?

Does  spiritual  life  mean  to  your  consciousness  a  matter  of  great  delight,  a  delight  far

transcending the happiness that the world of vital pleasures affords you or offers you?

Has your personal awareness come to a possession of a sense of peace and strength which

men who are not aspirants do not find in their everyday lives?

Do  you  feel  certain  that  your  power  of  discrimination  and  light  of  thought  have  been

steadily growing?

Is your life being gradually led  to such experiences which reveal to you the operation of a

will and intelligence other than your own, the will and intelligence of the Omnipotent Lord?

98

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Has there come into the conscious activities of your everyday life, the active function of a
new delightful angle of  vision,  a  new  perspective,  a  strong  sense  of  self-possession,  a  steadily
growing  convinction  of  your  dependence  upon  and  intimate  relation  with  the  all-pervading
Divinity?

If  your  answers  to  all  these  questions  or  to  any  one  of  them  are  in  the  affirmative,  be

absolutely sure that

you are progressing, and progressing speedily, in the spiritual path.

267.  When the Jiva undergoes transmigration and takes another birth after leaving
this physical body, is it necessary that we should perform the Shraddha ceremony for him?
He is no more in the heavens.  To whom will the ablations go?

The  Pitris  remain  in  heaven,  Pitri  Loka  or  Chandra  Loka,  for  a  very  long  period.    The
enjoyments in heaven and the peace of the departed soul are enhanced by the performance of the
Shraddha ceremony.  Likewise the sufferings of the departed soul in worlds other than heaven are
mitigated by the performance of the Shraddha ceremony by his sons.  Thus, in both cases, the
performance of Shraddha is a great help.

And even if the individual takes another birth immediately after his death, as happens in
rare  cases,  the  performance  of  Shraddha  adds  to  his  happiness  in  his  new  birth.    So,  it  is  the
imperative duty of everybody to perform the Shraddha ceremony for his parents and forefathers.
The Shraddha ceremony should be performed with great Shraddha or faith as long as you live.
Faith is the main support for religion.

The various religious observances imposed upon mankind by the Shastras tend to purify
the  ignorant  man.    The  Shraddha  ceremony,  being  one  of  the  obligatory  duties  as  per  the
injunctions of the scriptures, also tends to purify the mind.  Besides this, the forefathers are also
pleased and their good wishes and blessings tend to our material and spiritual growth.

268.  How long should one practice Sirshasan or Paschimottanasan or Kumbhak or
Maha Mudra to awaken the Kundalini?  Nothing is mentioned on this point in any book on
Yoga.

It all depends upon the degree of purity, stage of evolution, the degree of purification of

the Nadis and the Pranamaya Kosha, and the degree of Vairagya and yearning for liberation.

A student starts his Sadhana from the point or stage he left in his previous birth.  Some
are born with account of purity and other requisites of realization on their having undergone the
necessary discipline in their past life.  They are born Siddhas.  Guru Nanak, Jnana Dev of Alandi,
Vama Dev and Ashtavakra were all adepts from their very boyhood.  Guru Nanak, when he was a
boy, asked his teacher in the school about the significance of OM.  Vama Dev delivered lectures
on Vedanta when he was dwelling in his mother’s womb.

99

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

269.  I am a devotee of Lord Siva.  Should I go to temples dedicated to Lord Vishnu

or Devi also?  And if I go, how shall I worship the Deities there?

Yes, you should never miss an opportunity of visiting and worshipping at any shrine you
come  across.    When  you  go  to  a  temple  of  Lord  Vishnu  or  Devi,  worship  Lord  Siva  Himself
there.  Look upon the Deity in the temple as another form of Lord Siva.  If your father came to
you in the attire of a High Court Judge, or being an actor in a drama, if he came to you in the
dress of a female, will you turn away from him?  You will greet him as your own father in any
case.  Similar should be your attitude in worshipping the Lord.  God is one.  He is worshipped
and adored variously by various people.

270.  Swamiji, what is the sense in worshipping the Guru as people do here in India?

Isn’t that slavery?  You mean to say that the disciple becomes the slave of the Guru?

Aren’t you grateful to the man who serves you and helps you?  Don’t you express your
gratitude to him in some form or the other?  If you behave that way with a man who has helped
you a little bit in a secular way, how much more ought to be your gratitude to the man who shows
you the path to the Supreme?  He has given you new life, nay, immortality and eternal bliss.  Can
you refrain from expressing your gratitude to him?  Actual worship of the Guru is the Indian way
of expressing this highest gratitude.  You express gratitude to the man who has helped you by
giving him something; and to the Guru(cid:190)
the man who has bestowed upon you the highest gift of
spiritual knowledge(cid:190)
you give yourself!

That is not slavery.  Oh, no.  The real Guru can never enslave the aspirant.  In fact, the
real Guru is the seeker’s servant!  The real Guru has the highest kind of love for the aspirant.
The Guru is in his heart; the Guru has won the disciple’s heart; the two have become one now.
There will be divine love between the two(cid:190)

not slavery.

271.  How can a person, who has been thinking in a negative way for a long time,

change to positive thinking?

Let  him  start  with  some  positive  suggestive  formulas:  “I  am  hale  and  hearty.    I  am
healthy.  There is nothing wrong with me.  I was under a misconception of my own abilities and
capacities.  Now I have realized my real nature”.  Let him do it with the help of  some  person
advanced in Yoga or a devotee of the Lord.  Let him start with a prayer to the Lord.  Let him
make prayer a part of his daily life and ‘a must’ in life.  All negative thinking will end and he will
become quite normal.

272.  What is the purpose of singing Kirtans constantly?

Singing of Kirtans incessantly will produce divine vibrations within and these vibrations
are  so  powerful  as  to  counteract  all  external  forces  distracting  the  human  mind  and  arrest  the
wanderings of the mind, bringing peace and happiness to the individual.  There is a mysterious
power  in  the  Divine  Name  that  singing  it  purifies  the  heart  and  mind  and  makes  the  Kirtanist
God-conscious.

100

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

SUBJECT INDEX

(Figures indicate Question Numbers)

A

B

C

Advaita

and Saguna Bhakti

Akashvani
Arjuna
Asceticism

rationale of

Astral body
Ayurveda

Beauty
Bhagavad Gita

fact or fiction
and the rationale of creation
locale for the teaching of the

Bhakti

vis-a-vis Jnana        
how to develop

Brahmacharya

Sirshasana and
failure in
family life and 

Brahmamuhurta

glory of 

Chitta Suddhi

signs to indicate

Cinema
Communism
Concentration
easy way to
how to increase the power of

Conscience

on the killing of

Consciousness

cosmic

123
143
210
148
139
100
47

217
223
42
81
92

172
218
224

174
250
208
205
225
136

continuity of

Contentment

and defeatist mentality
idleness and
Cow-slaughter
Creation

the ‘why’ of        

how to develop

Dance
Death
Deer-skin
Desire
Devotion

Earth
Ethics

Evil

D

E

F

G

Gandhiji

assassination of
politics and

Ganges

sacredness of

God

belief in

God-realisation

married life and

Goodness

vis-a-vis saintliness

101

23, 32, 78

151
99, 149
89
126, 230

241

38
121
142

132

150

177
239

28

82
152

200

1, 2

192
84
114

13, 14
156

93
16
181, 188, 207

and the Industial Revolution

33
229, 248

Fasting

frequency in

3

Food

vegetarian and non-vegetarian

Grace

how to invoke
manifestations of
difficulties and

Greatness

Guru

criteria for measuring

necessity for a
on changing the
qualifications of a
worship of the

Hatha Yoga

age and

Heaven
Hell

Idol worship
Ikons
Indigestion

removal of
Ishta Devata

Jesus
Jiva

evolution of the

Jivanmukta

astral body of a

Jnani

vision of a

H

I

J

K

Kala

Karma

meaning of

Karma Yoga
practice of

how to free oneself from

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

6
31
86

35
179
49
66, 75
87
270

171
222
222

190
58

140
112

58

34
254
255

135

137

182

238, 260

and His play with the Gopis

Kevala Kumbhak
Kirtan

purpose of

Krishna

Kundalini

Japa and
ascent of
awakening of

Life

Lust

goal of

conquest of

L

M

Mahavakyas,

significance of the

Mary
Maya

origin of
Meat-eating
Meditation

distinguished from Japa
advisability after night meal
life and
clues to success in

Mediumship
Mind

faults in the
purification of the
how to control the
higher and lower
distinguished from soul

Moha

power of
conquest of

Moksha

need for

Mouna
Music

power of

102

63

272

102

10
72
133

149
129, 261

141

116
58

120
202

5
15
111
128
105
154
11
12
48, 168
56
88

109
166

113
253
151
163

Pada Puja
Philosopher

Pilgrimage

and the man of the world

vis-a-vis a sight-seeing trip
benefits of a

Politics

vis-a-vis religion

Pranayama               

and the need for a Guru
and its suitability for women
obstructed breathing and

90, 203
27
91
96

N

P

R

Nadi Suddhi

indications of

Naga Sadhus
National character
Nauli
Nirguna Brahman

meaning of

Nirvikalpa Samadhi

Prarabdha

power of
how to overcome

Prayers

miracles and

Preordination

and free will

Rama

grief of
Ram Tirth
Realised soul

how to know a

Reason

Rebirth

limitations of

interval before
desires and

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

immediate
world population and

Religion

economic betterment and

Retributive justice
Rogues

S

Sadasiva Brahmendra
Sadhana

and city life
signs of progress in
regularity in
obstacles to

Sadhus

begging and

Saints 

curses of

Samadhi

how to enter into

Sannyasa

test of one’s fitness for
vis-a-vis family life
seclusion and
and the need for progeny
worldly connections and
family responsibilities and 
coloured cloth and
how to qualify for
and parents’ permission

Sannyasins

Sanskrit
Scriptures
study of

Seance
Self, nature of the
Semen
Senses

abstraction of the

Serenity

how to develop

Service

scope for

39
201
79
117

134
60

214

119

20
21

161

24
45

65

103
167

17

46
52, 53
54
211

103

108, 157

and their contributions to society

162
176

106
164
235

2, 194
257
51
122
220
258

118
59, 195
30

228

22, 95
29
94
98
159
130, 167
180
186
221

101
183
209
178
104
83
196

125

199

131

Vibrations
spiritual

124, 165

MAY I ANSWER THAT?

Universe

evolution of the

Untouchability

Sex energy

sublimation of the

Sex urge
Shraddha

Sin

Sirshasana
Siva Linga

the importance of

procreation and

esoteric meaning of the

Sleep

control of

Smoking

how to stop

Social work
Soul

Spiritual literature

value of

Suffering

of virtuous men

Suicide
Superconsciousness

T

Thought-reading
Tiger-skin
Truth

inviolability of

proof for the existence of the

43
216

267

206
203

173

68

80
198

7

74
89

44

Women

and spiritual life
devotional nature of
role of
and Yoga practice

61, 62

World

70, 155, 259
153, 197
127

nature of its unreality

World peace

role of politicians in

Yogasanas

women and

Yogi

and reaction to disease
powers of a

Yogic vision
nature of

U

V

W

Y

73
71

160
26
144
191
237

187

85

204

41
158

107

104

